Section 202 of the Social Security Act states that benefits are paid through the month before the month in which a beneficiary dies. Thus, no benefits are paid for the month of death. This rule has been in the law since 1939. The rule does not apply to Medicare, which provides benefits up to the date of death.Social Security benefits are paid on a monthly basis. The check (or direct bank deposit) for each month's benefit is issued in the following month. For example, the check that an individual receives in February is the benefit payable for January. This is referred to as a retrospective payment system. If a beneficiary dies late in the month, family members or the executor of the estate may not notify the Social Security Administration (SSA) in time to stop the payment. Subsequently, they are informed that the check must be returned to the government.Members of Congress are asked often to support legislation that would provide a full or partial benefit payment for the month of death. The following section presents common arguments for and against paying Social Security benefits for the month of death.Critics of the current policy argue that withholding benefits for the month of death does not make sense. They maintain that a person's bills do not stop at the beginning of the month in which they die. Moreover, the deceased beneficiary's family members or estate have to pay funeral and burial expenses. The unfairness of the policy is often illustrated with a comparison of the individual who dies on the last day of the month and receives no benefit for that month, and the individual who dies at 12:05 a.m. the next day and receives a full benefit for the preceding month. Critics complain that the current policy is cruel in that it adversely affects individuals who are already distressed by the death of a family member. They find the circumstances in which a check must be returned to the government to be the most incomprehensible.
Persons who are affected often ask questions such as Do you mean my father (or mother) had to live each day of their final month to get a benefit for that month? Why are family members placed at a disadvantage when a beneficiary dies at the end of the month after having incurred living expenses throughout most of the month? How could the government have established such a policy? Critics contend that the public views the policy as an anomaly—as a mistake in the design of the Social Security system. If the policy was intended to reduce the cost of the system, they see it as a "poor" device to do so. They argue that the policy discredits the system by creating the impression that it is arbitrary, unbending, and thoughtlessly bureaucratic. They maintain that benefits should be paid at least for the part of the month that the beneficiary was alive.Supporters of the current policy argue that paying benefits for the month of death would be costly. SSA estimates that paying full benefits for the month of death would cost $1.6 billion annually. Alternatively, paying 50% of the benefit if the beneficiary dies in the first half of the month, and a full benefit if the beneficiary dies in the second half of the month, would cost an estimated $1.2 billion annually. Pro-rating the benefit based on the number of days the beneficiary was alive during the final month would cost an estimated $800 million annually. SSA also estimated the increase in benefit payments under a proposal in which (1) a full benefit for the month of death would be payable to a surviving spouse (the surviving spouse would not be required to have been living with the beneficiary when the death occurred or to be entitled to benefits), or (2) if there is no surviving spouse, a pro-rated benefit based on the number of days the beneficiary was alive during the final month would be payable.
Each house of the United States Congress is expressly authorized within the Constitution to "punish" its own Members for misconduct, and the Senate has exercised this authority in the past by imposing formal "censures," imposing restitution costs, and by expelling Senators from the Senate. In imposing legislative discipline against their Members, the Senate and the House operate through their rulemaking powers, and the express provision for legislative discipline is specifically set out within the clause of the Constitution establishing the rulemaking authority of each house of Congress, at Article I, Section 5, clause 2:Each House may determine the Rules of its Proceedings, punish its Members for disorderly Behaviour, and, with the Concurrence of two thirds, expel a Member.The underlying justification for legislative discipline has traditionally been to protect the integrity and dignity of the legislative institution and its proceedings, rather than merely to punish an individual; and such internal legislative process is additional to any potential criminal or civil liability that a Member might incur for any particular misconduct. Senators are subject to internal, congressional discipline for any conduct which the institution of the Senate believes warrants such discipline. The express constitutional authority drafted by the Framers of the Constitution was influenced by British parliamentary practice, as well as our own colonial legislative experiences, and reflects the principle and understanding that although the qualifications of Members of Congress were intentionally kept to a minimum to allow the voters the broadest discretion in sending whomever they please to represent them in Congress, the Senate and the House have the right to discipline those who breach their privileges or decorum, or who damage their integrity or reputation, even to the extent of expelling from Congress a duly-elected Member.On several occasions, Senate committees to whom censure or expulsion resolutions were referred have recommended certain discipline to the full body, but either the Senate took no action, adjourned prior to consideration (and the Member was defeated in a subsequent election), the Member resigned before Senate action, or the Senate simply did not act upon the particular recommendation or resolution.
An exclusion is where the Senate (or the House) refuses to seat a Member-elect, generally upon the objection of another Member or Member-elect, by a simple majority vote on the grounds that such challenged Member-elect has either not met the three standing constitutional qualifications of office (age, citizenship, and inhabitancy in the state from which elected), or was not "duly elected." The authority of the Senate to exclude a Member-elect by a simple majority vote of the body—although there had been some legitimate minority argument to the contrary in the past—is now clearly understood to be limited to questions of whether a Member-elect meets the constitutional qualifications for office, or the question of whether the Member-elect had been "duly elected" (a question which is generally resolved in a so-called "contested election" case). The Supreme Court in Powell v. McCormack stated clearly that "the Constitution leaves the House [and the Senate] without authority to exclude any person, duly elected by his constituents, who meets all the requirements for membership expressly prescribed in the Constitution."The precedents in the Senate which pre-date the 1969 Powell v. McCormack decision, and which consider moral character and/or past misconduct in assessing the "suitability," "fitness," or "qualifications" of an individual who was duly elected by the voters of a state in an "exclusion" proceeding, are, therefore, of suspect relevance and value as a precedent concerning this issue at the present time. As explained in Deschler ' s Precedents , "The [ Powell ] decision apparently precludes the practice of the House or Senate, followed on numerous occasions during the 19 th and 20 th centuries, of excluding Members-elect for prior criminal, immoral, or disloyal conduct."There is no limitation apparent in the text of the Constitution, nor in the deliberations of the Framers, on the authority to expel a Member of Congress, other than the two-thirds vote requirement. One study of the expulsion clause summarized the Framers' intent as follows:[From] the history of Article I, Section 5, clause 2, and in particular its course in the Committee of Detail, it is clear that the Framers ...
did not intend to impose any limitation on Congressional power to determine what conduct warranted expulsion .... Nor do the debates in the Convention suggest any desire to impose any other substantive restrictions on the expulsion power.Justice Joseph Story similarly concluded that it would be "difficult to draw a clear line of distinction between the right to inflict the punishment of expulsion, and any other punishment upon a member, founded on the time, place, or nature or the offense," and that "expulsion may be for any misdemeanor, which, though not punishable by any statute, is inconsistent with the trust and duty of" a Member.The Supreme Court of the United States, citing Justice Story's historic treatise on the Constitution, found an expansive authority and discretion within each house of Congress concerning the grounds and the timing for an expulsion. In In re Chapman , the Supreme Court noted the Senate expulsion case of Senator William Blount as supporting the constitutional authority of either house of Congress to punish a Member for conduct which in the judgment of the body "is inconsistent with the trust and duty of a member" even if such conduct was "not a statutable offense nor was it committed in his official character, nor was it committed during the session of Congress, nor at the seat of government."The Supreme Court has thus recognized a very broad discretion and authority of each house of Congress to discipline its Members under its own chosen standards, generally without established right to judicial review. Describing the congressional disciplinary process, the Supreme Court in United States v. Brewster , noted in dicta :The process of disciplining a Member in the Congress ... is not surrounded with the panoply of protective shields that are present in a criminal case. An accused Member is judged by no specifically articulated standards, and is at the mercy of an almost unbridled discretion of the charging body ...
from whose decision there is no established right of review.It is thus likely that a court would find, in a similar fashion to the above quoted dicta of the Supreme Court in Brewster (regarding "no established right to review" of a congressional disciplinary action), that the issue of an expulsion of a Senator by the Senate (or a Representative by the House) is a non-justiciable "political question" in which there exists a "textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department" of government. Unlike the factual premise in the Powell exclusion, an expulsion of a Member for misconduct would not appear to involve another, express constitutional provision which may be in conflict with the exercise of such authority of the legislature; nor would such action arguably impinge upon the constitutional rights of an individual. In fact, in Powell v. McCormack , Justice Douglas in his concurring opinion noted the difference in justiciability between that exclusion case based on "qualifications" other than those established in another, express provision of the Constitution, as opposed to an expulsion case based on misconduct, by noting that "if this were an expulsion case I would think that no justiciable controversy were presented."Although the authority and power of each house of Congress to expel appears to be within the broad discretion of the institution, or as noted by the Supreme Court in dicta "at the unbridled discretion of the charging body," policy considerations, as opposed to questions of power , may have generally restrained the Senate and the House in exercising the authority to expel a Member when the conduct complained of occurred prior to the time the individual was elected to be a Member of Congress, or when the conduct complained of occurred in a prior Congress when the electorate knew of the conduct but still reelected the Member to the current Congress. On occasion, this restraint has been characterized, such as in dicta by the Supreme Court, as evidence that "both Houses have distrusted their power to punish in such cases" of past misconduct. The Court in Powell v.
McCormack, supra , in distinguishing the exclusion of Powell from an expulsion, observed that congressional precedents have shown that "the House will not expel a member for misconduct committed during an earlier Congress." The Court noted specifically, however, that it was not actually ruling on the House's authority to expel for past misconduct, and, as noted above, Justice Douglas, in his concurrence stated specifically that "if this were an expulsion case I would think that no justiciable controversy were presented," since Douglas agreed with Senator Murdock of Utah in a 1940 exclusion case that each house may "expel anyone it designates by a two-thirds vote."It should be noted that the principal congressional case cited by the Supreme Court for its assertion in Powell v. McCormack that the House "will not expel" for prior misconduct, the case involving Representative John W. Langley, involved many other relevant considerations. Although the committee in that instance did question the ability of the House to expel an individual for misconduct (resulting in a criminal conviction) "prior to his election as a Member," the committee also found that "the House could not permit in its membership a person serving a sentence for a crime." In resolving this apparent conflict, the committee reported to the House that Representative Langley, whose conviction prior to his reelection was pending on appeal, had agreed not to participate in House proceedings while the appeal was pending, and had agreed to resign if his appeals were denied. After Langley's appeals were denied by the Supreme Court, he resigned his office.It should also be noted that many of the arguments opposed to proceeding against a Member of the House for misconduct in a prior Congress were based on the concept that the existing House should not take recognition of injuries to a past House of Representatives. The Senate, however, has consistently considered itself to be a "continuing" body," and thus injuries to the integrity and dignity of the Senate in the past may not have the same character of being, arguably, against a "different" institution or body.
In the report on the McCarthy censure, the Select Committee to Study Censure charges specifically stated the following:Precedents in both the Senate and House for expulsion or censure for conduct occurring during a preceding Congress may be found in Hinds (op. cit. 1275 to 1289). Precedents in the House cannot be considered as controlling because the House is not a continuing body.A careful reading of congressional precedents would appear to indicate that although there has certainly been some questioning of the "right" of the body to expel a Member for past misconduct when reelected, with knowledge of his constituents of that conduct, there have been divisions of opinions on this subject. For example, there were two conflicting opinions of two different House committees in the Credit Mobilier investigations on the discipline of Representatives Ames and Brooks in the 42 nd Congress in 1872. In adopting a disciplinary resolution of censure and not expulsion in that case, however, the House specifically refused to accept a preamble to the substitute resolution for censure which had expressly questioned its authority to expel for past misconduct. Differences of opinion also arose in other expulsion and disciplinary cases.In modern congressional practice, and in light of Supreme Court rulings and dicta , it would appear to be more accurate to say that restraint concerning a Member's expulsion after reelection has arisen from a questioning by the institution of the Senate or the House of the wisdom of such a policy , rather than a formal recognition of an absence of constitutional power to expel for past misconduct. The reticence of the House or the Senate to expel a Member for past misconduct after the Member has been reelected by his or her constituents, with knowledge of the Member's conduct, appears to reflect the deference traditionally paid in our heritage to the popular will and election choice of the people.
Although the indictment, as well as the alleged misconduct, occurred subsequent to the time of Senator Smith's election to the Senate by the Ohio legislature, Senator Adams discussed in broad terms the Senate's authority to expel, finding that "By the letter of the Constitution the power of expelling a Member is given to each of the two Houses of Congress, without any limitation other than that which requires a concurrence of two-thirds." This sole limitation, that is, the two-thirds requirement, was in the opinion of the select committee "a wise and sufficient guard against the possible abuse of this legislative discretion."The distinction between the "power" of the House of Representatives to expel, and the judicious use of that power as a "policy" of the House, was cogently explained in a House Judiciary Committee report in 1914:In the judgment of your committee, the power of the House to expel or punish by censure a Member for misconduct occurring before his election or in a preceding or former Congress is sustained by the practice of the House, sanctioned by reason and sound policy and in extreme cases is absolutely essential to enable the House to exclude from its deliberations and councils notoriously corrupt men, who have unexpectedly and suddenly dishonored themselves and betrayed the public by acts and conduct rendering them unworthy of the high position of honor and trust reposed in them....But in considering this question and in arriving at the conclusions we have reached, we would not have you unmindful of the fact that we have been dealing with the question merely as one of power , and it should not be confused with the question of policy also involved. As a matter of sound policy, this extraordinary prerogative of the House, in our judgment, should be exercised only in extreme cases and always with great caution and after due circumspection, and should be invoked with greatest caution where the acts of misconduct complained of had become public previous to and were generally known at the time of the Member's election.
To exercise such power in that instance the House might abuse its high prerogative, and in our opinion might exceed the just limitations of its constitutional authority by seeking to substitute its standards and ideals for the standards and ideals of the constituency of the member who had deliberately chosen him to be their Representative. The effect of such a policy would tend not to preserve but to undermine and destroy representative government.The power to expel is thus used cautiously when the institution of Congress might be seen as usurping or supplanting its own institutional judgment for the judgment of the electorate as to the character or fitness for office of an individual whom the people have chosen to represent them in Congress. The principal manner of dealing with ethical improprieties or misconduct of a Representative (Senators were not at the time of the adoption of the Constitution, and until 1913, chosen directly by the people, but were selected by the state legislatures) was intended by the Framers to be, and has historically been, reliance upon the voters to keep their Members "virtuous" through the "restraint of frequent elections." However, there is no indication in the actual text of the Constitution or in the debates on the adoption of Article I, Section 5, clause 2, that such limitation has been imposed, nor has any judicial ruling on the authority or power of the Senate found an express or implied limitation on the expulsion power, to reach only conduct that was not known to an electorate prior to election or reelection of the Senator.Actual expulsions in the Senate (as well as in the House) have historically concerned cases of perceived disloyalty to the United States Government, or of a violation of criminal statutory law which involved abuse of one's official position.
However, it should be noted that the Senate Select Committee on Ethics, in 1995, recommended the expulsion of a Member for conduct which had not been the subject of any criminal prosecution, but which involved allegations of an abuse of the authority of the Senator's office and position in making unwanted sexual advances to women, enhancing his personal financial position, and for obstructing and impeding the Committee's investigation.In the United States Senate, 15 Senators have been expelled, 14 during the Civil War period for disloyalty to the Union (one expulsion was later revoked by the Senate), and one Senator was expelled in 1797 for other disloyal conduct. Although the Senate has actually expelled relatively few Members, and none since the Civil War, other Senators, when facing a recommended expulsion for misconduct, have resigned their seat rather than face the potential expulsion action. In the House of Representatives, five Members have been expelled—3 during the Civil War period for disloyalty, one in 1980 after conviction of bribery and conspiracy in congressional office, and one Member in 2002 after his convictions for bribery, receipt of illegal gratuities, and other corruption charges, while several other Members, facing potential expulsion, resigned their offices prior to action by the full House of Representatives.The Senate has demonstrated that in cases of conviction of a Member of crimes that relate to official misconduct, that the institution need not wait until all of the Senator's judicial appeals are exhausted, but that the Senate may independently investigate and adjudicate the underlying factual circumstances involved in the judicial proceedings, regardless of the potential legal or procedural issues that may be raised and resolved on appeal. In the last expulsion action regarding a sitting Member of the Senate who had been convicted of a crime, the Senate Select Committee on Ethics went forward with the disciplinary investigation and hearing after the Senator's conviction, and issued its report recommending expulsion prior to the conclusion of the appellate procedure, but suggested that the Senate postpone consideration of the committee's report and recommendation of discipline until after the Senator's appeals were concluded.
Subsequent to the Member's conviction, and up until the time the full Senate considered the Senate Select Committee on Ethics's recommendation of expulsion in this particular matter, the Senator who had been convicted of the felony offenses continued to participate and vote on the floor of the Senate.It may be noted, generally, that as to precedents in the Senate concerning the policy considerations and procedural decisions regarding disciplinary actions, as well as precedents in the House of Representatives, that such precedents are, of course, not necessarily binding on a subsequent Senate, but are given substantial weight and consideration in the formulation of each Member's consideration of the matter.The term "censure," unlike the term "expel," does not appear in the Constitution, although the authority is derived from the same clause in the Constitution at Article I, Section 5, clause 2, concerning the authority of each house of Congress to "punish its Members for disorderly Behaviour." The Standing Orders of the Senate provide that the Select Committee on Ethics may recommend to the Senate disciplinary action against a Member "including, but not limited to, in the case of a Member: censure, expulsion, or recommendation to the appropriate party conference regarding such Member's seniority or positions of responsibility ...."A "censure" in the Senate has traditionally meant the "punishment" imposed by the Senate when the full body formally disapproves of conduct or behavior of a Member by way of the adoption, by majority vote, of a resolution expressing such condemnation or disapproval. Under Senate Rules, no forfeiture of rights or privileges automatically follows a "censure" by the Senate, but the individual political party caucus or conference rules in the Senate may have relevance to party and committee leadership positions.The term "censure" is used to describe the formal action of the Senate adopting a resolution expressing the body's "censure," "condemnation," "denouncement," or general disapproval of a Member's conduct even when the word "censure" is not expressly included in the language of the resolution.
In the two earliest Senate censure cases cited by historians and parliamentarians, the resolutions finally adopted by the Senate did not use any specific term of disapproval, such as "censure," "condemn," or "denounce," but merely stated the relevant findings and the conclusion that Senator Pickering, in 1811, "committed a violation of the rules of this body"; and that Senator Tappan, in 1844, was "guilty of a flagrant violation of the rules of the Senate and disregard of its authority." During the floor discussion of the 1844 censure it was stated by a Member of the Select Committee examining the matter that the use of no express word of disapproval in the previous censure resolution of Senator Pickering in 1811 was "evidently designed as a mild form of censure."Senators Bingham of Connecticut, in 1929, and McCarthy of Wisconsin, in 1954, were "condemned" by the full Senate in a resolution; while the resolutions adopted in the cases of Senators McLaurin and Tillman of South Carolina, in 1902, and Thomas Dodd of Connecticut, in 1967, used the term "censure." Senator Talmadge in 1979, and Senator Durenberger in 1990, were "denounced" in the resolutions adopted by the Senate.The term "condemn" has been used in two censure resolutions in the Senate, in 1929 and in 1954. It appears that no distinction of great import was made at the times of those actions in using the word "condemn" in the censure resolutions, as opposed to the term "censure," and that the terms were seen at the times employed as substantially synonymous.In the censure of Senator Joseph McCarthy from Wisconsin, the select committee considering the matter recommended in its report that on two of the charges investigated the "Senator from Wisconsin, Mr. McCarthy, should be censured," and reported out favorably the resolution referred to the committee which provided that the conduct of the Senator "is hereby condemned." In the floor consideration of the resolution, the Chairman of the Select Committee to Study Censure Charges, Senator Watkins of Utah, was questioned in a colloquy by another member of the Select Committee concerning the uses of the terms "censure" and "condemn":Mr. CASE.
Let me ask the Senator from Utah how he refers to the adoption of a censure resolution which would have for its main substance section 1, which uses the word "condemn," and when he now proposes that section 2 be modified by including the words "and condemn"? How does the Senator from Utah think that modification will modify the censure proposed in Section 2? Mr. WATKINS. The modification strikes out the word "censure." Mr. CASE. Yes; but then we come to the words "and condemn" in section 1, although the Senator from Utah still refers to the resolution as a censure resolution. Mr. WATKINS. That is a difference of semantics. Some persons believe that "condemn" is a stronger word than "censure"; and some persons believe that "censure" is a stronger word than "condemn." I do not know which is which.The Select Committee and its Chairman in the McCarthy censure did not officially distinguish between the meaning of the two terms employed. However, it is clear that at least one Member of the Senate at the time felt that the term "condemn" was the stronger term, and that the Senator was not necessarily dissuaded from that perception by the Select Committee Chairman. At present, it may be argued that the use of the verb "condemn" in a censure resolution, although not officially distinguished from using any other word in such resolution, may be perceived to be a somewhat stronger disapproval than merely using the term "censure," based in large part on the feelings associated with the last Senator to be "condemned" for conduct in a censure resolution, the late Senator Joseph McCarthy. In a later Senate consideration of a censure resolution, the Chairman of the then Senate Select Committee on Standards and Conduct, Senator Stennis of Mississippi, stated that he had believed that the term "condemn" was a harder and a more "severe" term than "censure."The term "denounce" has been used in two relatively recent censure resolutions in the Senate.
However, they should by viewed now by history as equivalent in meaning to "censured" but applied to special cases where the financial duties of a senatorial office have been subject to gross neglect and where years of illegal activities by subordinates have been overlooked, if not encouraged.***Thus, even though the Committee avoided the use of the word censure and even though the general historical precedents are strongly [sic], it none the less applied words defined in terms of "censure" to the misconduct of Senator Talmadge.From the full Senate consideration of the matter, it appears that a common opinion was that the term "denounce" was employed to recognize that there were "mitigating" circumstances involved in the case, and to recognize that it had not been concluded by the committee that the improprieties were engaged in by the Senator willfully and with actual knowledge, and thus the term "censure" would not be used.The Senate Select Committee on Ethics in its report in the matter of Senator Durenberger did not state an express reason or justification for using the term "denounce" rather than "censure" or "condemn" in the resolution it recommended for adoption, although the special counsel's report to the Committee suggested that the precise verb in a censure resolution is not as important as the Committee's characterization of the conduct in a resolution which is then formally adopted by the full Senate. During the Senate consideration of the resolution a member of the Select Committee on Ethics, Senator Lott of Mississippi, noted that an amendment offered during Committee procedures to substitute the term "censure" for "denounce" was defeated, and it was the Senator's opinion that a "denouncement" was intended to be a lesser term of disapproval than a "censure" because of the mitigating circumstances and the lack of venal intent in the case.Questions concerning the meaning of the term "denounce" employed in the resolution were directed to the Chairman of the Select Committee on Ethics, Senator Heflin of Alabama.
Some early commentators thus felt that the authority to "punish" a Member by way of censure or condemnation was thus expressly limited, unlike expulsion, to cases concerning disorderly or unruly behavior or conduct in Congress, that is, conduct which disrupts the institution.The authority to discipline by way of censure, however, has come to be recognized and accepted in congressional practice as extending to cases of "misconduct", even outside of Congress, which the Senate or House finds to be reprehensible and to reflect discredit on the institution, and which is, therefore, worthy of condemnation. As stated in S.Rept. 2508, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. 22 (1954) by the Senate Select Committee to Study Censure Charges:It seems clear that if a Senator should be guilty of reprehensible conduct unconnected with his official duties and position, but which conduct brings the Senate into disrepute, the Senate has the power to censure.The House of Representatives has similarly taken a broad view of its authority to discipline its Members by way of expulsion or censure. In the 63 rd Congress the House Judiciary Committee described the power of the House to punish for disorderly behavior as a power which is "full and plenary and may be enforced by summary proceedings. It is discretionary in character ... restricted by no limitation except in case of expulsion the requirement of the concurrence of a two-thirds vote." In the report on Representative Adam Clayton Powell, the House Select Committee described censure cases as follows:Censure of a Member has been deemed appropriate in cases of a breach of the privileges of the House. There are two classes of privilege, the one, affecting the rights of the House collectively, its safety, dignity, and the integrity of its proceedings; and the other, affecting the rights, reputation, and conduct of Members, individually, in their representative capacity....
Most cases of censure have involved the use of unparliamentary language, assaults upon a Member or insults to the House by introductions of offensive resolutions, but in five cases in the House and one in the Senate [as of 1969] censure was based on corrupt acts by a Member, and in another Senate case censure was based upon noncooperation with and abuse of Senate committees.***This discretionary power to punish for disorderly behavior is vested by the Constitution in the House of Representatives and its exercise is appropriate where a Member has been guilty of misconduct relating to his official duties, noncooperation with committees of this House, or nonofficial acts of a kind likely to bring this House into disrepute.The authority and grounds for censure, under the express Constitutional authority of the Senate, at Article I, Section 5, clause 2, as well as under the Senate's own Rules and precedents, thus extend to misconduct or improprieties which may or may not violate an express statute or a particular written rule of ethical conduct. Even when not a violation of a particular law or rule, the Senate has censured Members for conduct when found contrary to "acceptable norms of ethical conduct in the Senate," contrary to "good" or "accepted morals" and "senatorial ethics," when found to "derogate from the public trust expected of a Senator," and/or for "reprehensible" conduct which brings the Senate into "dishonor and disrepute."It should be noted that prior to 1968 there were no written Senate ethics rules. Upon the drafting of a code of conduct in the Senate Rules for the first time in 1968, it was made clear that the drafting and existence of such an express, written code would not preempt nor supersede the existing, unwritten standards or norms of ethical behavior against which a Senator's conduct has been and may always be judged.
The earlier resolution in 1964 establishing and authorizing the Select Committee on Standards and Conduct (now the Select Committee on Ethics) was expressly intended to give to and to continue within that committee that portion of the Senate's traditional authority and jurisdiction to investigate, make findings, and report to the full body for consideration matters concerning official "misconduct" of Members, as well as violations of specific rules, codes, or statutes relating to official duties.The Senate has "censured" Members for violating orders of secrecy of documents in their possession; for fighting in the Senate; for allowing a lobbyist with interests in particular legislation to be on one's staff and on a committee considering such legislation, with access to the secret meetings and considerations of the committee; for non-cooperation and abuse of investigating committees of the Senate; and for financial irregularities concerning contributions, official expenses, and outside income.There is no precedent in the Senate for the full Senate to vote a resolution "reprimanding" a Member for misconduct, nor for any committee to recommend that the Senate "reprimand" a Senator, although such an action has been considered by the Senate and by at least one committee to which a disciplinary case was referred. In the censure case of the late Senator Thomas Dodd, Senator Tower introduced an amendment to substitute the word "reprimand" for that of "censure" in the resolution. Senator Tower argued that this "would give us the opportunity to express our displeasure, our disapproval, and our disassociation, but at the same time avoid the severity of censure, which ... is one of the most severe penalties that we could impose." Senator Stennis, the Chairman of the Select Committee on Standards and Conduct, argued against using the term "reprimand," contending that term had no historical context in Senate procedure and thus was without meaning in the Senate, and arguing that the term "censure" was appropriate to the facts and was less severe than using the term "condemn":Mr. STENNIS. ...
The matter was given as careful consideration as our capacity on the subject permitted; and we found that, uniformly, the legislative history of the United States had tended, for serious matters, always to use the word "censure" or the word "condemn". We found that there was some precedent, in the House of Representatives, in connection with the use of the word "reprimand," after passing a resolution of censure, to require the Member to present himself at the bar of the House and be publicly reprimanded there by the Speaker.***[I]t has been the custom in the House of Representatives in a censure resolution to require the Member of the House, if he is so censured by resolution, to come down before the bar and be publicly "reprimanded" by word of mouth by the Speaker. However, that has never been done in the Senate. We did not like the idea of doing that.***Members of the Senate, I will put this in this way, as to what we found as to the meaning of "reprimand" in legislative parlance. It just does not mean anything. It means what you might call just a slap on the wrist. It does not carry any weight.***We looked and looked and looked, and we feel certain that our research was complete, and therefore we totally rejected, for the reason I have given, the mild legislative word "reprimand," which has no meaning or means nothing more than just a disapproval, and put in the word "censure," which we thought was the mildest of the words that have a legislative meaning, and would carry the idea of the Senate taking a stand with reference to the matter.In the case of Senators Tillman and McLaurin who were "censured" by the full Senate in 1902 for fighting on the floor of the Senate, the Committee to whom the matter was referred considered the options for the Senate, including a "reprimand" of the Members which it considered "only a more formal reiteration [of an earlier contempt vote and] .. not sufficiently severe," found that the conduct should be "condemned" by the Senate and recommended a resolution which "censured" the Members.
The Committee explained:The Senate may punish the Senators from South Carolina by fine, by reprimand, by imprisonment, by suspension by majority vote, or by expulsion with the concurrence of two-thirds of its Members. The offense is well stated in the majority report. It is not grave enough to require expulsion. A reprimand would be too slight a punishment. The Senate by a yea-and-nay vote has unanimously resolved that the said Senators are in contempt. A reprimand is in effect only a more formal reiteration of that vote. It is not sufficiently severe upon consideration of the facts.Prior to the 1970s in the House of Representatives, although there were some inconsistencies, the terms "reprimand" and "censure" were often considered synonymous and used together in a resolution. In 1921, for example, a resolution adopted by the House instructed the Speaker to summon Representative Blanton of Texas to the bar of the House "and deliver to him its reprimand and censure". More recently, however, there has come to be a distinction in the House whereby it is considered that a "reprimand" involves a lesser level of disapproval of the conduct of a Member than that of a "censure", and is thus a less severe rebuke by the institution. Procedurally in the House, a "censure" resolution will generally instruct the Member to go to the well of the House and for the Speaker of the House to read the resolution as a verbal castigation of the Member. In the case of a "reprimand," however, the resolution is merely adopted by a vote of the House.Such procedures are not relevant to the Senate which merely adopts a censure resolution and does not require a Member to "go to the well" for a verbal rebuke. A resolution which is adopted by a formal vote of the Senate using the word "reprimand" would thus have the same effect and be governed by the same procedures as a "censure" in the Senate, and might thus possibly be considered as a "distinction without a difference" in the Senate and, technically, a form of "censure" as have been the recent "denouncements" in the Senate.
A resolution which uses the word "reprimand" in the Senate, although without historical precedent, might, however, be publicly perceived as similar to the modern House practice, that is, a minor rebuke, and may arguably be seen by the public as a lesser form of institutional disapproval or discipline than would the use of the words "condemn," "censure," or "denounce."Although not a disciplinary action employed by the full Senate, the Select Committee on Ethics may issue, and has issued a "reprimand" or other similar form of rebuke, in a report or in a letter to a particular Member, which is not voted upon by the full Senate. The Senate Select Committee on Ethics issued such a "reprimand" in a report concerning Senator Cranston and the so-called "Keating Five" investigations in 1991. The Committee found that the Senator's conduct "deserves the fullest, strongest and most severe sanction which the Committee has the authority to impose" and therefore the Committee "does hereby strongly and severely reprimand" the Senator. The Committee reprimand was reported to the full Senate, and discussion was taken on the Senate floor regarding the Committee's action, but no formal Senate action was required or taken by the full body. Under the current rules governing the Senate Select Committee on Ethics, the Committee may "dispose of" an ethics matter by issuing a "letter of admonition" after a preliminary inquiry (or after an adjudicatory review) if the Committee determines that a violation is "inadvertent, technical, or otherwise of a de minimis nature," and that such public or private letter "shall not be considered discipline."1. William Blount of Tennessee. July 8, 1797.Blount wrote a private letter to a United States Government interpreter seeking his aid in a plan to seize Spanish Florida and Louisiana with British and Indian help. A select committee found that Senator Blount's conduct in attempting to incite the Indians against U.S. government officials was inconsistent with his public duty, amounted to a "high misdemeanor," and recommended expulsion. The report was adopted 25 - 1.2. James M. Mason and Robert M. T. Hunter of Virginia; Thomas L. Clingman and Thomas Bragg of North Carolina; James Chestnut, Jr.
of South Carolina; A.O.P. Nicholson of Tennessee; William K. Sebastian and Charles C. Mitchell of Arkansas; John Hemphill and Louis T. Wigfall of Texas. July 11, 1861.The resolution of expulsion was introduced on July 10, 1861, recognizing the attempt of some persons to withdraw certain states from the Union, who are "in arms against the Government," and expressly charging that the above named Senators "have failed to appear in their seats in the Senate, and to aid the Government in this important crisis, and it is apparent to the Senate that said Senators are engaged in said conspiracy for the destruction of the Union and Government, or with full knowledge of such conspiracy have failed to advise the Government of its progress or aid in its suppression." The resolution was agreed to 32-10, July 11, 1861.3. John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky. December 4, 1861.The resolution of expulsion provided that Breckinridge "has joined the enemies of his country, and is now in arms against the Government he had sworn to support," and was agreed to 37 - 0.4. Jesse D. Bright of Indiana. February 5, 1862.Bright was charged with writing a letter in 1861 recommending an arms manufacturer to Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederacy, arguably demonstrating disloyalty to the United States. The Judiciary Committee considering the expulsion resolution recommended against expulsion; however, the full Senate after a lengthy debate voted to expel 32 - 14.5. Waldo P. Johnson of Missouri. January 10, 1862.Resolution of expulsion was referred to the Judiciary Committee which found that Mr. Johnson's failure to take his seat at the beginning of the session, and his failure to rebut allegations and indications of disloyalty to the Union, provide strong presumptive grounds against his fidelity to the Union. The expulsion resolution was adopted by a vote of 35 - 0.6. Trusten Polk of Missouri.
January 10, 1862.The Judiciary Committee reported the expulsion resolution which had been referred to it, concluding that Polk had written in a secession newspaper in favor of Missouri's joining "her Southern sisters," that he had failed to present himself to the Senate at the beginning of the session to rebut implications of disloyalty to the Union, and had in fact "gone clandestinely within the lines of the enemy" of the Union. The resolution of expulsion was adopted 36-0.1. Thomas Pickering of Massachusetts. January 2, 1811.Senator Pickering had made a speech on the floor of the Senate in which he read from a letter from the French Minister of Foreign Affairs, which was a confidential communication from the President to the Senate. Although there was then no written Senate rule concerning confidential communications, the resolution charged Pickering with reading certain documents while the "Senate was in session with open doors" and concerning which "the injunction of secrecy not having been removed," and in so doing committed a "violation of the rules of this body." The resolution, after the Senate accepted an amendment striking the word "palpable" before the word "violation" and disagreed to an amendment seeking to add the word "unintentional" before the word "violation," was agreed to by a vote of 20 - 7.2. Benjamin Tappan of Ohio. May 10, 1844.Tappan had delivered a document, furnished to the Senate under order of secrecy, to an individual to make available to the press. The resolution finally agreed to stated that Tappan, "in furnishing for publication in a newspaper documents directed by an order of the Senate to be printed in confidence for its use, has been guilty of a flagrant violation of the rules of the Senate and disregard of its authority." The resolution was agreed to by a vote of 38 to 7.3. John L. McLaurin and Benjamin R. Tillman of South Carolina. February 28, 1902.On the floor of the Senate on February 22, 1902, after having exchanged disparaging remarks directed towards one another, Tillman struck McLaurin in the face and they both fought until separated by several persons.
Immediately after the incident a resolution was adopted by a vote of 61 - 0 declaring both Senators "in contempt of the Senate," and referring the matter to the Committee on Privileges and Elections with instructions to report to the Senate what action should be taken. The Chair ruled that the Members would not be recognized unless on the motion of another Member and agreed to by a majority of the Senate. The Committee on Privileges and Elections then met and recommended a resolution of censure "for disorderly behavior and flagrant violation of the rules of the Senate during the open session of the Senate," and that such Senators are "so censured for the breach of the privileges and dignity of this body." The order of February 22 judging them in contempt was declared no longer in force or effect. The resolution for censure, and what amounted to, in effect, a six-day suspension, was agreed to by a vote of 54 - 12 on February 28, 1902.4. Hiram Bingham of Connecticut. November 4, 1929.A special subcommittee of the Judiciary Committee investigated the facts concerning the Senator's placing on the Senate payroll, first as his deputy and later as a clerk of a committee, an individual who worked as a paid employee for a trade association, the Manufacturers Association of Connecticut, having a direct interest in tariff legislation before that committee. The employee had access to secret committee deliberations because of his position. The subcommittee report (S.Rept. 43, 71 st Cong., 1 st Sess.) did not aver that the relationship violated any law or Senate rule. However, the chairman of the full Judiciary Committee introduced a resolution (S.Res. 146, 71 st Cong.) condemning the actions of the Senator which "while not the result of corrupt motives on the part of the Senator from Connecticut, is contrary to good morals and senatorial ethics and tends to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute, and such conduct is hereby condemned." The resolution was agreed to 54 - 22.5. Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin.
December 2, 1954.In 1951 and 1952 Senator McCarthy was under investigation by the Subcommittee on Privileges and Elections of the Rules and Administration Committee pursuant to a resolution of expulsion concerning conduct during an election, and since being elected to the Senate. Senator McCarthy first sought to bring formal charges against his accuser, and then challenged the investigation as designed to expel him "for having exposed Communists in Government." Although the subcommittee eventually made no disciplinary recommendation, it criticized the Senator for deliberately setting out "to thwart the investigation." In 1954 a resolution to censure Senator McCarthy was introduced and amended to include 46 separate counts of alleged misconduct. S.Res. 301, 83 rd Cong., 2d Sess. The Select Committee to Study Censure examined censure in five categories of charges including contempt of the Senate and obstruction of the legislative process. S.Rept. 2508, 83 rd Cong., 2d Sess. After floor debate, the full Senate voted to "condemn" McCarthy on two counts, for his "non-cooperation with and abuse of the Subcommittee on Privileges and Elections" in 1952 and for "abuse of the Select Committee to Study Censure." The modified resolution was adopted by a vote of 67 - 22.6. Thomas J. Dodd of Connecticut. June 23, 1967.The Select Committee on Standards and Conduct investigated allegations of unethical conduct concerning the Senator's relationship with a private businessman with interests in West Germany; the conversion of campaign contributions to personal use; the free use of loaned automobiles; and the acceptance of reimbursements from both the Senate and private sources. The Committee recommended censure on the use of campaign funds for personal purposes and the double reimbursements. Although no law nor Senate Rule prohibited the use of campaign funds for personal use, the Committee found that the testimonial dinners in question were political in character, and that the Senator was "presumed" to have knowledge of their political character, and thus should not have used the proceeds for his own personal purposes. S.Rept. 193, 90 th Cong., 1 st Sess. (1967).
After debate on the resolution, and a rejection of Senator Tower's amendment to substitute a "reprimand" for a "censure," among other proposed amendments, Senator Dodd was censured for having engaged in a course of conduct of "exercising the influence and power of his office as a United States Senator ... to obtain, and use for his personal benefit, funds from the public through political testimonials and a political campaign." Such conduct, although not violative of any specific law or Senate rule in force at that time was found "contrary to accepted morals, derogates from the public trust expected of a Senator, and tends to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute." S.Res. 112, 90 th Cong. The vote was 92 - 5.7. Herman E. Talmadge of Georgia. October 11, 1979.The Select Committee on Ethics investigated charges of financial irregularities in the office of Senator Talmadge, concerning excess official reimbursements, inaccurate financial disclosure and reporting, failure to timely and properly file campaign disclosures, and the personal use of campaign funds, potentially in violation of various federal laws and Senate rules. The Committee found that Senator Talmadge "either knew, or should have known, of these improper acts and omissions, and, therefore, by the gross neglect of his duty to faithfully and carefully administer the affairs of his office, he is responsible for these acts and omissions." S.Rept. 96-337, 96 th Cong., 1 st Sess. 18 (1979). The Committee recommended a finding to the full Senate that the conduct is "reprehensible and tends to bring the Senate into dishonor and disrepute and is hereby denounced." The Senate adopted S.Res. 249 by a vote of 81 - 15.A "denouncement" was expressly recommended because the Committee felt that the facts were "distinguishable from those of earlier matters in which the Senate `censured' or `condemned' a Member", and that the judgment of the Committee and the Senate concerning such conduct could be made using "words that do not depend on analogy to dissimilar historical circumstances for interpretation." S.Rept. 96-337, supra at 18.
As noted above, the action of the Senate formally adopting a resolution disapproving of conduct by way of "denouncing" the Member's conduct, is categorized by historians and parliamentarians in the Senate as a "censure" of that Member.Expulsions in the United States Senate, as well as in the House of Representatives, have been generally reserved for the most serious misconduct of a Member of Congress, historically concerning disloyalty to the government, or the conviction (or evidence) of an offense involving official corruption and/or the abuse of one's official position in Congress.Other than expulsion, a formal "censure" by the Senate is the strongest statement of disapproval and rebuke that the Senate, as an institution, invokes upon one of its Members. It may be possible that in addition to a formal censure the Senate may also require financial restitution from a Member, limit a particular privilege of a Member, or under current practice, recommend to the appropriate party conference the diminution of seniority status of a Senator. Although there is no specific disability that automatically follows a censure by the Senate, the public reprobation and formal rebuke by one's peers in the Senate may have arguably contributed to the unsuccessful reelection efforts of Senators subject to censure in recent times.The action of the full United States Senate formally adopting, by a vote requiring the majority of Members present and voting, a resolution disapproving of a Senator's conduct is considered by parliamentarians and historians as a "censure" of that Member. There is no precise, technical requirement concerning the required words in a resolution of censure, nor is there an official "hierarchy" or ranking of terms employed in such a resolution. The Senate has thus "censured" its Members by way of a resolution "condemning", "censuring" or "denouncing" the Member or the conduct of the Member, as well as by way of resolutions which do not include any express term of opprobrium.
Politics in Haiti have been generally violent and authoritarian, ever since Haiti became anindependent republic in 1804, when African-descended slaves revolted against their French colonialmasters. Between the end of the rule of Toussaint Louverture (leader of the slave rebellion) in 1803,and Francois Duvalier, founder of the 30-year dictatorship that fell in 1986 -- both of whom declaredthemselves president for life -- were some 30 other despotic rulers. This legacy would appeardifficult to overcome. In addition, most of the traditional centers of power in Haiti, such as themilitary, the Catholic and Protestant churches, the business sector, and the traditional elite, finddemocratic reformist ideas threatening in the Haitian context. The government apparatus is stillstaffed principally by Duvalierist appointees, many of whom have resisted change during thenumerous post-Duvalier governments and will most likely continue to do so.Haitian history is marked by conflict between two racial groups: the mulatto elite and themajority blacks. The vast majority of Haitians are black, poor, illiterate peasants. The mulattosestablished their economic power and elite status principally by controlling the business sector. Bothgroups enjoyed periods of political dominance. Black rulers generally emphasized Haiti's Africanroots and traditions, including the African-based folk religion, voodoo. The mulatto eliteemphasized a European, Catholic tradition. Because of their education, mulattos held somegovernment positions even during black rule.Race relations have improved in recent years: the once disdained Creole dialect used by themajority is now an official language spoken by all Haitians; interracial marriages are common; andthe government is no longer as dominated by mulattoes. But recent political events have againheightened racial and class tensions within Haiti. The poor black majority's only access to powerhas been through public protests, when tolerated, and the recent elections. The mulatto elite wieldsmost of the economic and political power in Haiti, and generally resists dramatic changes toward aredistribution of wealth and privilege to improve the lot of the poor majority.For much of this century, Haitian history was marked by occupation government or theauthoritarian Duvalier regime. The United States intervened in Haiti in 1915 to stop civil strife andprevent Germany from establishing a foothold there. By mid-August, 1915, there were more than2,000 U.S. Marines in Haiti.
(1) The Marines stayed until 1934, overseeing public works, taxcollection, treasury management, and the development of a native Haitian Constabulary which wasHaiti's first professional military force. Some of these contributions were welcome and muchneeded. But the U.S. presence was also deeply resented as an affront to Haitian sovereignty. ManyHaitians charged the United States with discriminating against blacks by placing mulattoes inpositions of power.By 1932, the U.S. withdrawal from Haiti was well underway during the Administration ofHerbert Hoover. Because of growing concerns about the effects of the occupation, President Hooverhad appointed a commission 1930 to study the U.S. involvement in Haiti. The commissionconcluded that while the occupation had brought about material improvements to Haiti, the U.S.occupation also excluded Haitians from positions of real authority in the government and theconstabulary. Under President Franklin Roosevelt, a disengagement agreement was signed in August1933, and the last contingent of U.S. Marines left Haiti in August 1934. (2) Francois Duvalier and his son Jean-Claude ruled Haiti for nearly 30 years, leaving behind alegacy of repression and corruption. Francois, or "Papa Doc," Duvalier became President in 1957through elections marred by numerous irregularities. Although Duvalier originally ran on a platformcalling for political liberty and social reform, within a year he had established himself as a dictator. Under his rule, arbitrary imprisonment, torture, and unexplained deaths became commonplace. TheDuvaliers' private militia, the Tontons Macoutes, carried out most of this repression. The Macoutes,Creole for "bogeymen," were loosely organized armed gangs enlisted by the Duvaliers to eliminateopposition to their rule through violence and extortion. The Macoutes also served to counterbalancethe army's power, which the Duvaliers kept in check to prevent military coups. (3) In 1964, the elder Duvalierhad the constitution amended to make himself president-for-life. In 1971, three months before hisdeath, he had it amended again so that he could name his 19-year-old son Jean-Claudepresident-for-life.In the 1980s, "Baby Doc" Duvalier's marriage to a prominent mulatto and their opulentlifestyle stirred up much resentment among the poor black majority who lived in absolute poverty. In addition, fiscal corruption was rampant and widely recognized in Jean-Claude's government. Aspopular dissatisfaction rose, his regime grew increasingly repressive.
In the face of massive populardemonstrations and pressure from abroad, Jean-Claude Duvalier fled the country for France onFebruary 7, 1986. The United States encouraged and helped arrange his departure.Aristide's 1991 ouster ushered in the seventh government in the five and one-half years sincethe young Duvalier's departure. The first interim government was a 6-man, military-dominatedNational Council of Government (CNG) that disbanded the Tontons Macoutes and allowed thedrafting of a new constitution. The new constitution, which over 99 percent of Haitian votersreportedly approved in a plebiscite, guaranteed personal liberties; distributed power among apresident, a Prime Minister, and two legislative houses; and transferred the police to the departmentof justice. It also created an independent electoral council to oversee elections leading to theinauguration of a civilian government in February 1988. Members of the armed forces and anyoneclosely associated with the Duvalier family dictatorship were barred from running for office. ButDuvalierists, in collaboration with the army, thwarted the November 1987 elections by mounting aviolent campaign that culminated in the killing of dozens of voters on election day; as a result of theviolence, the elections were suspended.In January 1988, the CNG ran its own elections, widely viewed as rigged in favor of LeslieManigat, a long-exiled academic. But less than 6 months later, on June 20, 1988, Manigat wasousted in a military coup when he tried to replace officials and reform the government. Lt. GeneralHenri Namphy, CNG president and close friend of Papa Doc's, seized power. During the 31 monthsthat Namphy ran the government (February 1986 to September 1988), human rights violationsincreased, with numerous political killings. Namphy was succeeded by Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril, whopromised a transition to democracy. But under Avril's regime, human rights continued to beroutinely violated, as reported by the U.S. State Department, human rights groups, and others. Violent popular protests forced Avril to resign after 18 months. As a result, in March 1990, a civilian government was appointed with the mandate of holdingelections as soon as possible. A coalition of political and civic organizations selected ErthaPascal-Trouillot, the only woman on the Supreme Court, as provisional President. A State Councilwas established with the objective of giving policy guidance to the executive branch.
The Councilsevered relations with the executive branch, however, after the executive branch failed to consult theCouncil or to take action against political violence. President Trouillot headed what was generallyconsidered a weak civilian government, unable or unwilling to effectively control the military. Sheestablished and cooperated with an independent electoral council that organized successful electionsat the end of the year.Hopes that Haiti would leave behind its authoritarian past were raised on December 16, 1990,when Haitians elected a President, national legislators, and municipal officials. Despite securityconcerns and lack of a democratic tradition, voter turnout was estimated to be 70 percent on electionday, and international observers declared the elections generally free and fair. The elections werein part the result of a strong democratic movement that had emerged in the late 1980s in support ofan elected government that would establish order in a non-repressive manner. The democraticmovement encompassed many elements of Haitian society, including political parties as well aspeasant, labor, human rights, and professional organizations. Many observers also credited thesuccess and relatively peaceful nature of the elections to the heavy presence of internationalobservers, whose presence the government of Haiti had requested, and to the economic and materialsupport provided by many nations and international organizations.Jean-Bertrand Aristide was elected President with 67.5 percent of the vote, and wasinaugurated on the fifth anniversary of the collapse of the Duvalier dictatorship. A 37-year-oldpopulist Roman Catholic priest, he was the most controversial of 11 candidates ruled eligible to runby the independent Provisional Electoral Council (CEP). To his supporters, Aristide is a martyr,willing to risk his life to defend the poor. An advocate of "liberation theology," Aristide spoke outagainst Duvalier and the military rulers who followed him. In September 1988, an armed groupattacked and burned Aristide's church, killing 13 and wounding 70; surrounded by his parishioners,Aristide escaped unharmed. To his detractors, Aristide is a potentially dangerous demagogue, whoseinflammatory oratory they say encourages the rampages, known as dechoukajes , or "uprooting" inCreole, in which suspected Tontons Macoutes are attacked or killed by angry mobs. Aristidereportedly denies that his book, 100 Verses of Dechoukaj , condones violence.
Nonetheless, theSalesian religious order expelled him for preaching politics from the pulpit, including what the ordercalled "class struggle."When Aristide became a candidate, he toned down his revolutionary and anti-U.S. rhetoric. Aristide previously opposed democratic elections in Haiti, arguing that free and fair elections wereimpossible as long as Duvalierists still had a hold on economic and political power. Nonetheless,he joined the race in response to former Tontons Macoutes chief Roger Lafontant's potentialcandidacy.Lafontant was ruled ineligible to run for the presidency, and in early January 1991, he led anattempted coup against President Trouillot in an effort to prevent Aristid, whom he called an"ultra-communist," from taking office on February 7, 1991. Lafontant seized the national palace andtried to declare martial law. Instead, the army arrested Lafontant and promised to have him tried inthe civilian courts. The popular celebration that followed turned violent as crowds hunted down andlynched dozens of suspected Macoutes. Mobs also burned down the 220-year old cathedral, inapparent retaliation for a homily by the Archbishop -- whose relations with Aristide have long beentense -- that warned of a coming "regime of authoritarian politics." Many foreign diplomatscriticized Aristide for not condemning the street violence quickly or forcefully enough.President Aristide was faced with some of the most serious and persistent social, economic,and political problems in the western hemisphere. After 8 months in office, Aristide had receivedmixed reviews. He was credited with curbing crime in the capital, reducing the number ofemployees in bloated state enterprises, and taking actions to bring the military under civilian control. But some observers questioned the new government's commitment to democracy. Neither Aristidenor his Prime Minister belonged to a political party, and leaders of other political parties criticizedhim for not reaching out and establishing a spirit of cooperation among the democratic elements. Many legislators, including some from Aristide's own coalition, protested the President'sappointment of Supreme Court judges and ambassadors without consulting the Senate as requiredby the constitution. Aristide later agreed to consult the legislature, but relations between the twobranches remained strained.Aristide was also criticized for his attitude toward the judicial system. Lafontant was triedin July 1991 for his role in the failed January coup attempt.
Aristide called for a life sentence --which Lafontant received -- although the constitution limited sentences to 15 years. Aristidedeclared the next day a national holiday. Many observers expressed concern over the trial, sayingit differed little from trials under the Duvaliers: it lasted for over 20 consecutive hours, importantwitnesses were not called, and the court appointed five lawyer trainees to defend Lafontant becauseeven his own lawyer felt it too dangerous to defend him.Initially criticized for not having a clear plan, the Aristide government in July 1991 presenteda macroeconomic reform and public sector investment plan to representatives of several nations andinternational lending institutions, who lauded the plan and pledged $440 million in FY1992 aid. Most of that aid was suspended because of the coup that overthrew Aristide's government onSeptember 30, 1991.Aristide's Human Rights Record. In the area ofrespect for human rights, President Aristide also had mixed reviews. He was criticized for appearingto condone mob violence, but was also credited with significantly reducing human rights violationswhile he was in office.Some observers believe that as President, Aristide helped to polarize the situation in Haitiby refusing to condemn violent acts of retribution, and holding out the threat of mob violence againstthose who disagreed with him. For example, Aristide refused to condemn the practice of "perelebrun", or burning someone to death with a "necklace" consisting of a gasoline-soaked auto tire. After the former head of the Tontons Macoutes was sentenced to life in prison, Aristide gave aspeech in which he noted that without popular pressure and the threat of "pere lebrun" in front of thecourthouse, the life sentence would not have been chosen.Moreover, in a September 27, 1991 speech, Aristide appeared to threaten former TontonsMacoutes with "pere lebrun." Aristide reportedly said, "You are watching all macoute activitiesthroughout the country. We are watching and praying. We are watching and praying. If we catchone, do not fail to give him what he deserves. What a nice tool! What a nice instrument! What anice device! It is a pretty one. It is elegant, attractive, splendorous, graceful, and dazzling. It smellsgood. Wherever you go, you feel like smelling it.
It is provided for by the Constitution, which bansmacoutes from the political scene." (5) In exile Aristide condemned the practice of necklacing. (6) Observers contend that in the speech Aristide also threatened the bourgeoisie for not havinghelped his government enough. (7) Some saw the speech as another factor leading to his overthrowjust days later, and maintain that members of the bourgeoisie were financially supporting the coupleaders. In a report on the Aristide government's human rights record, Americas Watch and two otherhuman rights groups wrote:It is unfortunate but understandable thatAristide's speeches in support of Pere Lebrun have overshadowed other speeches in which headvocated lawful redress for abuse....President Aristide had a duty to refrain from any statement thatcould be understood to support Pere Lebrun, and to speak out firmly and consistently against thisbarbaric practice. His failure to fulfill this duty is a serious blemish on his human rights record. (8)The report also reflected the views of many in the international community when itrecognized President Aristide as the "sole legitimate Haitian head of state," elected with a two-thirdsmajority, an unusual mandate in the hemisphere. The report further stated: "While we recognize theneed to correct the human rights shortcomings of the Aristide government ... we believe firmly thatthese failings cannot be used to justify committing yet a further, serious human rights violation bydepriving the Haitian people of the right to elect their government." (9) Most human rights monitors credit the Aristide government with being the first Haitiangovernment to address the need to improve respect for human rights, and the needs of the poormajority. They assert that progress made during his term was undone by the military regime thatfollowed. Most sources credit Aristide with creating a much greater sense of security in Haiti thanthere had been in years. He greatly reduced common crime in the city; the removal of the "chefs desections," or sheriffs, many of whom had ruled rural Haiti through extortion and violence fordecades, brought greater security to the countryside as well. According to the State Departmenthuman rights reports for 1991 and 1992, there were no reports of disappearances during Aristide'sterm, and dozens in the months following the coup.
The number of political killings also rosedramatically after Aristide was ousted.The September 1991 coup began just four days after Aristide addressed the United Nations,an event he reportedly said marked the end of Haiti's dark past of dictatorship. The State Departmentestimated coup-related deaths at 300-500, while Amnesty International estimated them to numberover 1,500.Role of the Military in the Democratic Process. Under the military-dominated interim governments, the Haitian army frequently impeded thedemocratic process. After the departure of the last military dictator in March 1990, however, someobservers believed there had been a transformation of the army to one supportive of democracy. Throughout the 1990 electoral process, the 7,000-man army proved itself capable of establishing andmaintaining order. Several factors accounted for the change, including attrition of anti-democraticelements with the downfall of the various interim governments; the army's inability to form a viablegovernment; a new generation of officers interested in reform and professionalization of the armedforces; and growing domestic and international pressure for a civilian democracy. Initially, the armyaccepted Aristide's assertion of authority, including his purge of the Haitian army high command. Brig. General Cedras, who oversaw security for the December elections, was reportedly a reluctantparticipant in the coup. But as its spokesman, he said Aristide was ousted for "meddling in armyaffairs." Some analysts argue the army does not want to relinquish control so that it can continueto profit from contraband- and narcotics-trafficking. In its attempts to implement provisions of the Haitian constitution that impose civilianauthority over the military, the Aristide government met significant army resistance. For example,the constitution calls for the separation of the police from the army, with the police under thecommand of the Ministry of Justice. The law also mandates that cases involving military abusesagainst civilians be tried in civilian courts, not by the military. The military had resisted previousefforts to execute those laws. No military personnel were prosecuted for human rights abuses underany of the interim governments. When he was overthrown, Aristide was opening an attack oncorruption, pressing reforms in the army, and creating a civilian police force.The military's trend toward improved human rights under the Aristide government wasreversed after the coup, according to the State Department's 1991 human rights report.
Crime is ordinarily proscribed, tried, and punished according to the laws of the place where it occurs. American criminal law applies beyond the geographical confines of the United States, however, under certain limited circumstances. State prosecution for overseas misconduct is limited almost exclusively to multi-jurisdictional crimes, that is, crimes where some elements of the offense are committed within the state and others are committed beyond its boundaries. A surprising number of federal criminal statutes have extraterritorial application, but prosecutions have been relatively few. This may be because when extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction does exist, practical and legal complications, and sometimes diplomatic considerations, may counsel against its exercise.The Constitution does not forbid either congressional or state enactment of laws that apply outside the United States. Nor does it prohibit either the federal government or the states from prosecuting conduct committed abroad. In fact, several passages suggest that the Constitution contemplates the application of American law beyond the geographical confines of the United States. It speaks, for example, of "felonies committed on the high seas," "offences against the law of nations," "commerce with foreign nations," and of the impact of treaties.More specifically, it grants Congress the power "[t]o define and punish Piracies and Felonies committed on the high Seas, and Offences against the Law of Nations"; the power "[t]o regulate commerce with foreign Nations"; and "[t]o make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof." The power to define and punish felonies on the high seas and the power under the Necessary and Proper Clause have been referenced in the past as the source of Congress's authority to enact extraterritorial criminal legislation primarily in a maritime context. The powers have been understood to permit overseas application of federal criminal law, even extending to an American vessel at anchor well within the territory of another nation.Congress's commerce powers are three; one, that vests it with power "[t]o regulate Commerce with foreign Nations," affords it apparent authority to enact criminal statutes with extraterritorial application.
The other two Commerce Clause powers permit Congress to regulate interstate commerce and commerce with the Indian tribes. The courts often speak of these two in exceptionally sweeping terms. The Foreign Commerce Clause may be even more far-reaching, although there is certainly support for a contrary view. Courts in some of the more recent cases have opted for a middle ground. One found that Congress did indeed have the legislative power to proscribe illicit overseas commercial sexual activity by an American who had traveled from the United States to the scene of the crime. Confronted with a vigorous dissent, the panel's majority expressly chose to avoid the issue of whether it would have reached the same result if the defendant had not agreed to pay for his sexual misconduct or some other commercial factor. Another court elected to construe the statute before it narrowly and thereby avoided the necessity of ruling on the scope of Congress's power under the foreign commerce clause. A third held that Congress's authority to regulate foreign commerce extended to the regulation of the channels of U.S. foreign commerce, but it left for another day the questions of whether the domestic effect on commerce prerogative has a foreign commerce counterpart or whether foreign commerce issues should be judged by standards of their own. Two other circuits, however, favor a more expansive view. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit has held that Congress's foreign commerce power at least mirrors the "channels," "instrumentalities," and "substantive effect" components of its interstate commerce powers. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit has gone even further and ruled that the Foreign Commerce Clause embodies not only the "channels" and "instrumentalities" authority, but also encompasses the power to regulate any "activities that demonstrably affect [U.S. foreign] commerce." Its own enumerated powers aside, Congress has resorted on countless occasions to its authority to enact extraterritorial legislation in furtherance of the powers vested in one of the other branches or in reliance on powers it shares with one of the other branches—through the necessary and proper clause.
Although American courts that try aliens for overseas violations of American law must operate within the confines of due process, the Supreme Court has observed that the Constitution's due process commands do not protect aliens who lack any "significant voluntary connection[s] with the United States." Moreover, the Court's more recent decisions often begin with the assumption that the issues of extraterritorial jurisdiction come without constitutional implications.Nevertheless, due process issues have surfaced in a handful, but growing number, of lower court decisions relating to extraterritoriality. A few courts describe a due process requirement that demands some nexus between the United States and the circumstances of the offense. Occasionally, they look to international law principles to provide a useful measure to determine whether the nexus requirement has been met. On other occasions, they consider the principles at work in the minimum contacts test for personal jurisdiction. At the heart of these cases is the notion that due process expects that a defendant's conduct must have some past, present, or anticipated locus or impact within the United States before he can fairly be held criminally liable for it in an American court. The commentators have greeted this analysis with some hesitancy, and some courts have simply rejected it.A related due process challenge is based on notice. It is akin to the concerns over secret laws and vague statutes, the exception to the maxim that ignorance of the law is no defense. Here, indicia of knowledge, of reason to know, of an obligation to know, or of reasonable ignorance of the law's requirements—some of which are reflected in international standards—seem to be the most relevant factors. Citizens, for instance, might be expected to know the laws of their own nation; seafarers to know the law of the sea and consequently the laws of the nation under which they sail; everyone should be aware of the laws of the land in which they find themselves and of the wrongs condemned by the laws of all nations.
On the other hand, the application of American criminal statute to an alien in a foreign country under whose laws the conduct is lawful would seem to evidence a lack of notice sufficient to raise due process concerns.Conceding this outer boundary, however, the courts fairly uniformly have held that questions of extraterritoriality are almost exclusively within the discretion of Congress; a determination to grant a statutory provision extraterritorial application—regardless of its policy consequences—is not by itself constitutionally suspect.For this reason, the question of the extent to which a particular statute applies outside the United States has generally been considered a matter of statutory, rather than constitutional, construction. General rules of statutory construction have emerged which can explain, if not presage, the result in a given case. The first of these holds that a statute that is silent on the question of overseas application will be construed to have only territorial application unless there is a clear indication of some broader intent. Moreover, "when a statute provides for some extraterritorial application, the presumption against extraterritoriality operates to limit that provision to its terms."At one time, the second rule of construction stated that the nature and purpose of a statute may provide an indication of whether Congress intended a statute to apply beyond the confines of the United States. Although hints of it can be found earlier, the rule was first clearly announced in United States v. Bowman . The Supreme Court's emphatic endorsement of the domestic presumption in a civil context in Morrison cast some doubt on Bowman 's continued vitality. Early indications were that the courts and commentators were unwilling to go that far. The Court in RJR Nabisco , another civil case, however, may have changed that. In RJR Nabisco , the Court seemed to take direct aim at Bowman without naming it. There may be some real question of the extent to which the Court still considers Bowman good law. The final rule declares that unless a contrary intent is clear, Congress is assumed to have acted so as not to invite action inconsistent with international law.
At one time, the cases seemed to imply the existence of another rule, that is, unless Congress declared that it intended a statute to apply overseas to both aliens and American nationals, it would be presumed to apply only to Americans. Yet as discussed below, the challenge seems less compelling in light of the generous reading of the internationally recognized grounds upon which to stake a claim.International law supports, rather than dictates, decisions in the area of the overseas application of American law. Neither Congress nor the courts are bound to the dictates of international law when enacting or interpreting statutes with extraterritorial application.Yet Congress looks to international law when it evaluates the policy considerations associated with legislation that may have international consequences. For this reason, the courts interpret legislation with the presumption that Congress or the state legislature intends its laws to be applied within the bounds of international law, unless it indicates otherwise.To what extent does international law permit a nation to exercise extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction? The question is essentially one of national interests. What national interest is served by extraterritorial application and what interests of other nations suffer by an extraterritorial application?The most common classification of these interests dates to a 1935 Harvard Law School study which divided them into five categories or principles corresponding to the circumstances under which the nations of the world had declared their criminal laws applicable: (1) the territorial principle that involves crimes occurring or having an impact within the territory of a country; (2) the nationality principle that involves crimes committed by its nationals; (3) the passive personality principle that involves crimes committed against its nationals; (4) the protection principle that involves the crimes which have an impact on its interests as a nation; and (5) the universal principle that involves crimes which are universally condemned. The American Law Institute's Third Restatement of the Foreign Relations Law of the United States contains perhaps the most comprehensive, contemporary statement of international law in the area.
It indicates that reasonableness defines the latitude that international law affords a country to enact, try, and punish violations of its law extraterritorially; its assessment of reasonableness mirrors a balancing of the interests represented in the Harvard study principles.While the Restatement's views carry considerable weight with both Congress and the courts, the courts have traditionally ascertained the extent to which international law would recognize extraterritorial application of a particular law by citing the Harvard study principles, read expansively.The territorial principle of the Harvard study principles applies more widely than its title might suggest. It covers conduct within a nation's geographical borders. Yet, it also encompasses laws governing conduct on its territorial waters, conduct on its vessels on the high seas, conduct committed only in part within its geographical boundaries, and conduct elsewhere that has an impact within its territory. Congress often indicates within the text of a statute when it intends a provision to apply within its territorial waters and upon its vessels. Although rarely mentioned in the body of a statute, the courts have long and regularly acknowledged the "impact" basis for a claim of extraterritorial application. This is particularly so, when the facts in a case suggest other principles of international law, in addition to the territorial principle. If the territorial principle is more expansive than its caption might imply, the protective principle is less so. It is confined to crimes committed outside a nation's territory against its "security, territorial integrity or political independence." As construed by the courts, however, it is understood to permit the application abroad of statutes which protect the federal government and its functions. And so, it covers the overseas murder or attempted murder of federal officers or those thought to be federal officers; acts of terrorism calculated to influence American foreign policy; conduct that Congress has characterized as a threat to U.S. national security; false statements or forgery designed to frustrate the administration of U.S. immigration law; entering the United States as a stowaway; or overseas bribery in connection with the award of federal government contracts. The nationality principle rests the exercise of extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction on the citizenship of accused.
It is the principle mirrored in the Supreme Court's statements in Blackme r v. United States , following the contempt conviction of an American living in Paris who ignored a federal court subpoena. As in the case of Blackmer , which evidenced both the nationality and the protective principles, cases involving the nationality principle often involve other principles as well.The passive personality principle recognizes extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction based on the nationality of the victim of the offense. It, too, has been asserted most often in the presence of facts suggesting other principles.The universal principle is based on the premise that offenses against all nations may be punished by any nation where the offender is found. At a minimum, it applies to piracy and offenses committed on the high seas on "stateless" vessels.Congress's declaration that a particular statute is to apply outside of the United States is the most obvious evidence of intent to create extraterritorial jurisdiction. Congress has expressly provided for the extraterritorial application of federal criminal law most often by outlawing various forms of misconduct when they occur "within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States." The concept of special maritime and territorial jurisdiction, if not the phrase, dates from the First Congress, and encompasses navigable waters and federal enclaves within the United States as well as areas beyond the territorial confines of the United States. Although the concept of the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States once embraced little more than places over which the United States enjoyed state-like legislative jurisdiction, U.S. navigable territorial waters, and vessels of the United States, its application has been statutorily expanded. It now supplies an explicit basis for the extraterritorial application of various federal criminal laws relating to:air travel (special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States); customs matters (customs waters of the U.S.); U.S. spacecraft in flight; evasive, stateless submersible vessels on the high seas; overseas federal facilities and overseas residences of federal employees; members of U.S. Armed Forces overseas and those accompanying them; human trafficking and sex offenses abroad by federal employees, U.S.
military personnel, or those accompanying them.The obligations and principles of various international treaties, conventions, or agreements to which the United States is a party supply the theme for a second category of federal criminal statutes with explicit extraterritorial application. The range of these treaty-based federal crimes differs. Some have extraterritorial application only when the offender is an American. Some address misconduct so universally condemned that they fall within federal jurisdiction regardless of any other jurisdictional considerations as long as the offender flees to the United States, is brought here for prosecution, or is otherwise "found in the United States" after the commission of the offense. Some enjoy extraterritorial application under any of a number of these and other explicit jurisdictional circumstances.Members of another category of explicit extraterritorial federal criminal statutes either cryptically declare that their provisions are to apply overseas or describe a series of jurisdictional circumstances under which their provisions have extraterritorial application, not infrequently involving the foreign commerce of the United States in conjunction with other factors.The Maritime Drug Law Enforcement Act (MDLEA) is somewhat unusual in that it expressly authorizes extraterritorial coverage of federal criminal law predicated on nothing more than the consent of the nation with primary criminal jurisdiction. MDLEA outlaws the manufacture, distribution, or possession with intent to manufacture or distribute controlled substances aboard vessels within the jurisdiction of the United States. It defines vessels within the jurisdiction of the United States not only in terms of ordinary U.S. maritime jurisdiction, but also envelops the maritime jurisdiction of other countries as long as they have consented to the application of the U.S. law aboard the vessel. The definition also encompasses "vessels without nationality" sometimes referred to as "stateless" vessels, that is, vessels for which no national registry is effectively claimed.MDLEA provides the basis for Coast Guard drug interdiction efforts in the Caribbean and in the eastern Pacific off the coast of Central and South America. The courts have concluded that MDLEA constitutes a valid exercise of Congress's constitutional authority to define and punish felonies on the high seas and offenses against the law of nations.
They are divided over whether the prosecution must show some nexus between the United States and the offense and over the application of the subsection of the act that assigns jurisdictional determinations to the court rather than to the jury.At least until Mor r ison and RJR Nabisco , the lower courts understood Bowma n and Ford to mean that a substantial number of other federal crimes operate overseas by virtue of the implicit intent of Congress. In fact, they construed Bowman and Ford to suggest that American extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction includes a wide range of statutes designed to protect federal officers, employees, and property; to prevent smuggling; and to deter the obstruction or corruption of the overseas activities of federal departments and agencies. They held, for instance, that the statute outlawing the assassination of Members of Congress may be applied against an American for a murder committed in a foreign country, and that statutes prohibiting the murder or kidnaping of federal law enforcement officials apply in other countries even if the offenders are not Americans, and even if the offenders simply incorrectly believed the victims were federal law enforcement officers. They have also considered extraterritorial jurisdiction appropriate to (1) cases where aliens have attempted to defraud the United States in order to gain admission into the United States; (2) false statements made by Americans overseas; (3) the theft of federal property abroad; (4) counterfeiting, forging, or otherwise misusing federal documents or checks overseas by either Americans or aliens; and (5) murder of a foreign national in another nation designed to facilitate the operation of a criminal enterprise in the United States. RJR Nabisco casts serious doubt on the continued validity of these assessments, at least the absence of some textual, structural, or contextual indication that Congress intended the statutes at issue to apply abroad.This is equally true to the implications of the earlier jurisprudence. A logical extension of earlier law would have been to conclude that statutes enacted to prevent and punish the theft of federal property apply worldwide.
And there seemed no obvious reason why statutes protecting the United States from intentional deprivation of its property by destruction should be treated differently from those where the loss is attributable to theft. The RJR Nabisco Court, however, did endorse implied extraterritoriality in the case of "piggyback" statutes—conspiracy, attempt, aiding and abetting, among them—whose provisions are necessarily predicated on some other crime. Earlier cases occasionally expressed the view that an individual might be guilty of conspiracy to violate a federal law within the United States notwithstanding the fact he never entered the United States; it was enough that he was a member of a conspiracy to violate the American law. The cases applied the same rationale to accessories to overseas federal crimes, and to piggyback offenses where criminal liability was predicated upon a crime that applies abroad. The Court in RJR Nabisco seemed to agree: "Congress's incorporation of these (and other) extraterritorial predicates into RICO gives a clear, affirmative indication that [RICO's criminal prohibitions] app[y] to foreign racketeering activity—but only to the extent that the predicates alleged in a particular case themselves apply extraterritorially." State criminal laws are less likely to apply overseas than federal laws. State law produces fewer instances where a statute was clearly enacted with an eye to its application overseas and fewer examples where frustration of legislative purpose is the logical consequence of purely territorial application. The Constitution seems to have preordained this result when it vested responsibility for protecting American interests and fulfilling American responsibilities overseas in the federal government.The primacy of the federal government in foreign affairs might suggest that the Constitution precludes the application of state law in other countries, but the courts and commentators have recognized a limited power of the states to enact law governing conduct outside the United States. Obviously, Congress may, by preemptive action, extinguish the legislative authority of a state in any area over which Congress has plenary powers. And the Supremacy Clause also renders treaties to which the United States is a party binding upon the states and therefore beyond their legislative reach.
The constitutional limitations aside, and in the absence of federal legislative action, however, "the question ... is one of whether the state actually intended to legislate extraterritorially, not whether it has the power to do so."The states have chosen to make their laws applicable beyond their boundaries in only a limited set of circumstances and ordinarily only in cases where there is some clear nexus to the state. Perhaps the most common state statutory provision claiming state extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction is one that asserts jurisdiction in cases where some of the elements of the offense are committed within the state's borders or others are committed elsewhere. Another common claim is where an individual outside the state attempts or conspires to commit a crime within the state; or one within the state attempts or conspires to commit a crime beyond its boundaries. Still others define the state's extraterritorial jurisdiction to include instances where the victim of homicide, fatally wounded outside of the state, dies within it; where property stolen elsewhere is brought into the state; or where conduct outside the state constitutes the failure to comply with a legal duty imposed by state law.Although a substantial number of federal criminal statutes have undisputed extraterritorial scope and a great many more until recently thought to have apparent extraterritorial range, prosecutions have been relatively few. Investigators and prosecutors face legal, practical, and often diplomatic obstacles that can be daunting. Some of these are depicted in the description that follows of some of procedural aspects of the American investigation and prosecution of a crime committed abroad.With respect to diplomatic concerns, the Restatement observes:It is universally recognized, as a corollary of state sovereignty, that officials of one state may not exercise their functions in the territory of another state without the latter's consent. Thus, while a state may take certain measures of nonjudicial enforcement against a person in another state, ... its law enforcement officers cannot arrest him in another state, and can engage in criminal investigation in that state only with that state's consent.
Failure to comply can result in strong diplomatic protests, liability for reparations, and other remedial repercussions, to say nothing of the possible criminal prosecution of offending foreign investigators. Consequently, investigations within another country of extraterritorial federal crimes without the consent or at least acquiescence of the host country are extremely rare.Congress has endorsed diplomatic efforts to increase multinational cooperative law enforcement activities. The United States has over 70 mutual legal assistance treaties in force. Their benefits are typically available to state and federal law enforcement investigators though the Department of Justice's Office of International Affairs. Initially negotiated to overcome impediments posed by foreign bank secrecy laws, the treaties generally offer more than the collection and delivery of documents. They ordinarily provide similar clauses, with some variations, for locating and identifying persons and items; service of process; executing search warrants; taking witness depositions; persuading foreign nationals to come to the United States voluntarily to present evidence here; and forfeiture-related seizures.Witness depositions may be taken in a foreign country using letters rogatory. Letters rogatory involve the formal request from the courts of one country to those of another asking that a witness's statement be taken. The procedure is governed by statute and rule. It is often a resource of last resort. The process, through diplomatic channels, is time consuming, cumbersome, and lies within the discretion of the foreign court to which it is addressed. American law enforcement officials have historically used other, often less formal, cooperative methods overseas to investigate and prosecute extraterritorial offenses. Over the last few decades the United States has taken steps to facilitate cooperative efforts. In addition to the more traditional presence of members of the Armed Forces and State Department personnel and contractors, federal civilian law enforcement agencies have assigned an increasing number of personnel overseas. For example, the Justice Department's Criminal Division has resident legal advisors in 45 countries abroad; and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) now operates legal attache offices in 78 foreign cities; the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has offices in 92 cities overseas; the U.S.
Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency operates out of 75 locations; and the Secret Service has 20 such offices.A few regulatory agencies with law enforcement responsibilities have working arrangements with their foreign counterparts. The Securities and Exchange Commission, for instance, with 105 similar foreign regulatory entities, is a signatory of the International Organization of Securities Commissions' multilateral memorandum of understanding (IOSCO MMOU) for enforcement cooperation and the exchange of information.Congress has enacted several measures to assign foreign law enforcement efforts in this country in anticipation of reciprocal treatment. For instance, the Foreign Evidence Request Efficiency Act of 2009 authorizes Justice Department attorneys to petition federal judges for any of a series of orders to facilitate investigations in this country by foreign law enforcement authorities. The authorization extends to the issuance of: search warrants; court orders for access to stored electronic communications and to communications records; pen register or trap and trace orders; and subpoena authority, both testimonial and for the production of documents and other material.Search and seizures conducted abroad occasionally have Fourth Amendment implications. The Supreme Court's United States v. Verdugo-Urquidez decision makes it clear that the Fourth Amendment does not apply to the search of the property of foreign nationals outside the United States, unless the property owner has some "previous significant voluntary connections with the United States." The Fourth Amendment's application to U.S. citizens and foreign nationals with significant connections to the United States is less clear. Prior to Verdugo-Urquidez , neither the Fourth Amendment nor its exclusionary rule were considered applicable to overseas searches and seizures conducted by foreign law enforcement officials, except under two circumstances. The first covered foreign conduct which "shocked the conscience of the court." The second reached foreign searches or seizures in which U.S. law enforcement officials were so deeply involved as to constitute "joint ventures" or some equivalent level of participation. The cases seldom explained whether these exceptions operated under all circumstances or only when searches or seizures involved the person or property of U.S. nationals. In the days when MLATs were scarce, however, the courts rarely, if ever, encountered circumstances sufficient to activate either exception.
Since Verdugo-Urquidez , the courts have held, as a general rule, that the Fourth Amendment is inapplicable to searches or seizures of U.S. citizens by foreign officials in other countries, but have continued to acknowledge the "joint venture" and "shocked conscience" rarely found exceptions to the general rule. Prior to Verdugo-Urquidez, there seems to have been general agreement among the lower federal appellate courts that the Fourth Amendment governed the foreign search and seizure of the person or property of U.S. citizens by U.S law enforcement officials. Since then, the question more often has been not whether the Fourth Amendment governs, but what it demands. With some exceptions, a warrant issued by the neutral magistrate upon a finding of probable cause is the hallmark of a reasonable Fourth Amendment search or seizure in this country. Two concurring opinions in Verdugo-Urquidez and subsequent lower court endorsements suggest that the warrant requirement does not apply to searches by U.S. officials in other countries, at least where the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure or other authority do not authorize the issuance of a warrant.Nevertheless, "the Fourth Amendment's reasonableness standard applies to United States officials conducting a search affecting a United States citizen in a foreign country." On the other hand, even under such circumstances, "a foreign search is reasonable if it conforms to the requirements of foreign law," and "such a search will be upheld under the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule when United States officials reasonably rely on foreign officials' representations of foreign law."Like the Fourth Amendment protection against unreasonable searches and seizures, the Fifth Amendment self-incrimination clause and its attendant Miranda warning requirements do not apply to statements made abroad to foreign officials, subject to the same "joint venture" and "shocked conscience" exceptions. The Fifth Amendment and Miranda requirements do apply to custodial interrogations conducted abroad by American officials regardless of the nationality of the defendant. Finally, as a general rule, to be admissible at trial in this country, any confession or other incriminating statements must have been freely made.As a general rule, prosecution of federal crimes must begin within five years.
Federal capital offenses, certain federal sex offenses, and various violent federal terrorist offenses, however, may be prosecuted at any time. Prosecution of nonviolent federal terrorism offenses must begin within eight years. Moreover, the statute of limitations is suspended or tolled during any period in which the accused is a fugitive. Whatever the applicable statute of limitations, Section 3292 authorizes the federal courts to suspend it in order to await the arrival of evidence requested of a foreign government:Upon application of the United States, filed before return of an indictment, indicating that evidence of an offense is in a foreign country, the district court before which a grand jury is impaneled to investigate the offense shall suspend the running of the statute of limitations for the offense if the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that an official request has been made for such evidence and that it reasonably appears, or reasonably appeared at the time the request was made, that such evidence is, or was, in such foreign country. Section 3292 suspensions may run for no more than six months if the requested foreign assistance is provided before the time the statute of limitations would otherwise have expired and for no more than three years in other instances. The suspension period begins with the filing of the request for foreign assistance and ends with final action by the foreign government upon the request. The government must show by a preponderance of the evidence that the purpose of the request is to obtain evidence located overseas. Because of the built-in time limits, however, the government need not show that it acted diligently in its attempts to gather overseas evidence. The circuits are divided over whether the section may be used to revive a statute of limitations by filing a request after the statute has run, and over whether the section can be used to extend the statute of limitations with respect to evidence that the government has already received at the time it filed the request.
At least one circuit has held that the statutory reference to "the district court before which a grand jury is impaneled to investigate the offense" is intended to identify the court that may issue the suspension order and does not limit the statute to requests filed in aid of a pending grand jury investigation.Extradition is perhaps the oldest form of international law enforcement assistance. It is a creature of treaty by which one country surrenders a fugitive to another for prosecution or service of sentence. The United States has bilateral extradition treaties with roughly two-thirds of the nations of the world. Treaties negotiated before 1960 and still in effect reflect the view then held by the United States and other common law countries that criminal jurisdiction was territorial and consequently extradition could not be had for extraterritorial crimes. Subsequently negotiated agreements either require extradition regardless of where the offense occurs, permit extradition regardless of where the offense occurs, or require extradition where the extraterritorial laws of the two nations are compatible.More recent extradition treaties address other traditional features of the nation's earlier agreements that complicate extradition, most notably the nationality exception, the political offense exception, and the practice of limiting extradition to a list of specifically designated offenses.Federal crimes committed within other countries are more likely than not to be the work of those who live there. Yet, the "most common type of treaty provision provides that neither of the contracting parties shall be bound to deliver up its own citizens or subjects." Most treaties negotiated of late, however, contain either an article declaring that extradition may not be denied on the basis of nationality or one declaring that if extradition is denied on the basis of nationality, the case must be referred to local authorities for prosecution."The political offense exception is now a standard clause in almost all extradition treaties of the world." Originally designed to protect unsuccessful insurgents in flight, it is often construed to include both the purely political offense such as treason and sedition and related political offenses such as an act of violence committed during the course of, and in furtherance of, a political upheaval.
The exception is somewhat at odds with contemporary desires to prevent, prosecute, and punish acts of terrorism. Consequently, treaties forged over the last several years frequently include some form of limitation on the exception, often accompanied by a discretionary right to refuse politically or otherwise discriminatorily motivated extradition requests.Current U.S. extradition treaties signed prior to the 1980s list specific crimes to which the treaty is limited. In the nation's first extradition treaty the list was limited to murder and forgery; toward the end of the 20 th century the standard lists had grown close to more than 30 crimes. Treaties agreed to more recently opt for a generic description.As an alternative to extradition, particularly if the suspect is not a citizen of the country of refuge, foreign authorities may be willing to expel or deport him under circumstances that allow the United States to take him into custody. In the absence of a specific treaty provision, the fact that the defendant was abducted overseas and brought to the United States for trial rather than pursuant to a request under the applicable extradition treaty does not deprive the federal court of jurisdiction to try him.Federal crimes committed within the United States must be tried where they occur. Crimes committed outside the United States are tried where Congress has provided. Congress has enacted both general and specific venue statutes governing extraterritorial offenses. Section 3238, the general provision, permits the trial of extraterritorial crimes either (1) in the district into which the offender is "first brought" or in which he is arrested for the offense; or (2) prior to that time, by indictment or information in the district of the offender's last known residence, or if none is known, in the District of Columbia. The phrase "first brought" as used in section 3238 means "first brought while in custody." The phrase "is arrested" applies when the accused is initially taken into custody under an indictment that is subsequently dismissed. As the language of the section suggests, venue for all joint offenders is proper wherever venue for one of their number is proper.
Courts are divided over whether section 3238 may be applied even though venue may have been proper without recourse to its provisions.On occasion, Congress will enact individual provisions covering venue for offenses committed abroad. The Controlled Substances Import and Export Act and the Maritime Drug Law Enforcement Act (MDLEA) are two such examples. The Controlled Substance section outlaws overseas possession with intent to import into the United States. MDLEA outlaws possession of controlled substances on vessels subject to the jurisdiction of the United States. They contain parallel venue provisions, which permit trial in the judicial district where the accused enters the United States or in the District of Columbia. A federal court may subpoena a United States resident or national found abroad to appear before it or the grand jury. Federal courts ordinarily have no authority to subpoena foreign nationals located in a foreign country. Mutual legal assistance treaties and similar agreements generally contain provisions to facilitate a transfer of custody of foreign witnesses who are imprisoned in a foreign nation and in other instances to elicit assistance to encourage foreign nationals to come to this country and testify voluntarily.Unable to secure the presence of witnesses who are foreign nationals, Rule 15 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure permits federal courts to authorize depositions to be taken abroad, under "exceptional circumstances and in the interests of justice." They may admit such depositions into evidence in a criminal trial as long as the demands of the Federal Rules of Evidence and the Constitution's Confrontation Clause are also satisfied.Originally, only a defendant might request that depositions be taken under Rule 15 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, but they have been available to prosecutors since the 1970s. The Rule offers depositions as an alternative to long-term incarceration of material witnesses. Otherwise, depositions may be ordered only under exceptional circumstances. Some courts have said that to "establish exceptional circumstances the moving party must show the witness's unavailability and the materiality of the witness's testimony." Others would add to these that "the testimony is necessary to prevent a failure of justice" or additional considerations.
As general matter, depositions are to be taken in the same manner as depositions in civil cases. Moreover, the Rule requires that the defendant be afforded an opportunity to attend depositions taken at the government's request. When a deposition is taken abroad, the courts prefer that the defendant be present, that his counsel be allowed to cross-examine the witness, that the deposition be taken under oath, that a verbatim transcript be taken, and that the deposition be captured on videotape; but they have permitted depositions to be admitted into evidence at subsequent criminal trials in this country, notwithstanding the fact that one or more of these optimal conditions are not present. In nations whose laws might not otherwise require, or even permit, depositions under conditions considered preferable under U.S. law, a treaty provision sometimes addresses the issue.Although the government will ordinarily take depositions under the conditions that would permit them to be used as evidence at trial, "[c]ompliance with Rule 15 is a necessary but not sufficient condition for use of a deposition at trial." The question of admissibility of overseas depositions rests ultimately upon whether the Confrontation Clause requirements have been met. The right of an accused under the Confrontation Clause embodies not only the prerogative of a literal face-to-face confrontation, but also the right to cross examine and to have the witness's testimonial demeanor exposed to the jury. The early cases relied on the Supreme Court's decisions either in Ohio v. Roberts or in Maryland v. Craig . Faced with the question of whether trial witnesses might testify remotely via a two-way video conference, Craig held that the Confrontation Clause's requirement of physical face-to-face confrontation between witness and defendant at trial can be excused under limited circumstances in light of "considerations of public policy and necessities of the case." Roberts dealt with the question of whether the admission of hearsay evidence violated the Confrontation Clause, and declared that as long as the hearsay evidence came within a "firmly rooted hearsay exception" its admission into evidence in a criminal trial constituted no breach of the clause.After Roberts and Craig , however, the Supreme Court held in Crawford v.
Washington that "testimonial" hearsay could not be considered reliable and admitted into evidence without the safeguard of cross examination. Crawford forecloses subsequent reliance on Roberts ' across-the-board hearsay rule exception when faced with the question of whether a "testimonial" deposition may be admitted into evidence at trial. Crawford repudiates the suggestion that Roberts permits anything less than actual confrontation in the case of "testimonial" hearsay in the form of a deposition or any other form. The status of Craig 's video and public interest exception is less clear. At least one appellate panel has concluded that the prosecution's need for critical evidence does not alone supply the kind of public policy considerations necessary to qualify for a Craig exception; but another has held that national security interests may suffice. Since the pre- Crawford cases required a good faith effort to assure the defendant's attendance at overseas depositions, it might be argued that Crawford requires no adjustment in the area's jurisprudence. Moreover, the Eleventh Circuit's en banc Craig analysis implied that it thought the use of overseas depositions at trial more compatible with the confrontation clause than the use of video trial testimony. Yet in a later video case, the Fourth Circuit rejected a Confrontation Clause challenge when the circumstances satisfied the dual demands for a Craig exception: (1) denial of a face-to-face confrontation made necessary by important policy considerations, and (2) assurance of reliability in the form of an "oath, cross-examination, and observation of the witness' demeanor." The Federal Rules of Evidence govern the admissibility of evidence in federal criminal trials. A deposition taken overseas that has survived scrutiny under Rule 15 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure and the Confrontation Clause is likely to be found admissible. The hearsay rule, Rule 802, which reflects the law's preference for evidence that is exposed to the adversarial process, poses the most obvious obstacle.
The Rule, however, provides an explicit exception for depositions, one that has been applied to depositions taken abroad under the authority of Rule 15.When witnesses and other evidence are located in other countries, a defendant's statutory and constitutional rights may conflict with the government's need for secrecy for diplomatic and national security reasons. Rule 16 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure entitles a defendant to disclosure of any of his statements in the government's possession, but the prosecution's case may have evolved from foreign intelligence gathering. The Sixth Amendment assures a criminal defendant of "compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor," but providing a witness who is also a terrorist suspect and in federal custody may have an adverse impact on the witness's value as an intelligence source. The Sixth Amendment promises a criminal defendant the right to confront the witnesses against him, even a witness who presents classified information to the jury.Congress has provided the Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA) as a means of accommodating the conflict of interests. The CIPA permits the court to approve prosecution prepared summaries of classified information to be disclosed to the defendant and introduced in evidence, as a substitute for the classified information. The summaries, however, must be an adequate replacement for the classified information, because ultimately the government's national security interests "cannot override the defendant's right to a fair trial."There is a statutory procedure designed to ease the evidentiary admission of foreign business records in federal courts. The section covers "foreign record[s] of regularly conducted activity" in virtually any form, i.e., any "memorandum, report, record, or data compilation, in any form, of acts, events, conditions, opinions, or diagnoses, maintained in a foreign country." It exempts qualified business records from the operation of the hearsay rule in federal criminal proceedings and permits their authentication upon foreign certification. Finally, it establishes a procedure under which the reliability of the documents can be challenged in conjunction with other pre-trial motions.
While the prosecution's failure to provide timely notice of its intent to rely upon the section does not necessarily bar admission, its failure to supply a foreign certification of authenticity precludes admission under the section.Early appellate decisions upheld Section 3505 in the face of Confrontation Clause challenges, as in the case of depositions drawing support from Ohio v. Roberts . As noted above, Crawford cast doubt upon the continued vitality of the all-encompassing Roberts rule (hearsay poses no confrontation problems as long as it falls within a "firmly rooted hearsay exception") when it held that only actual confrontation will suffice in the case of "testimonial" hearsay. Although it left for another day a more complete definition of testimonial hearsay, Crawford did note in passing that "[m]ost of the hearsay exceptions covered statements that by their nature were not testimonial—for example business records." More than one later court panel has rejected a confrontation clause challenge to Section 3505 on the basis of this distinction.The Constitution grants Congress broad powers to enact laws of extraterritorial scope and imposes few limitations on the exercise of that power. The states enjoy only residual authority, but they too may and have enacted criminal laws which apply beyond the territorial confines of the United States. Prosecutions are relatively few, however, perhaps because of the practical, legal, and diplomatic obstacles that may attend such an endeavor.8 U.S.C. § 1375a(d)(3) (informed consent violations by international marriage brokers)15 U.S.C. § 1175 (manufacture or possession of gambling devices)15 U.S.C. § 1243 (manufacture or possession of switchblade knives)15 U.S.C. § 1245 (manufacture or possession of ballistic knives)16 U.S.C. § 3372(a)(3) (possession of illegally taken fish or wildlife)18 U.S.C. § 81 (arson)18 U.S.C. § 113 (assault)18 U.S.C. § 114 (maiming)18 U.S.C. § 115 (violence against federal officials, former officials and members of their families)18 U.S.C. § 117 (domestic assault by an habitual offender)18 U.S.C. § 118 (interference with certain protective functions [State Department & diplomatic security])18 U.S.C. § 249 (hate crimes)18 U.S.C. § 546 (smuggling goods into a foreign country from an American vessel)18 U.S.C. § 661 (theft)18 U.S.C. § 662 (receipt of stolen property)18 U.S.C.
§ 831 (threats, theft, or unlawful possession of nuclear material or attempting or conspiring to do so)18 U.S.C. § 931 (purchase, ownership, or possession of body armor by violent felons)18 U.S.C. § 1025 (false pretenses)18 U.S.C. §§§ 1081 - 1083 (gambling ships)18 U.S.C. § 1111 (murder)18 U.S.C. § 1112 (manslaughter)18 U.S.C. § 1113 (attempted murder or manslaughter)18 U.S.C. § 1115 (misconduct or neglect by ship officers)18 U.S.C. § 1201 (kidnaping)18 U.S.C. § 1363 (malicious mischief)18 U.S.C. § 1460 (sale or possession with intent to sell obscene material)18 U.S.C. § 1466A (obscene visual representation of sexual abuse of children)18 U.S.C. § 1587 (captain of a slave vessel with slaves aboard)18 U.S.C. § 1591 (sex trafficking of children)18 U.S.C. § 1656 (piratical conversion of vessel by captain, officer or crew member)18 U.S.C. § 1658 (plundering a ship in distress)18 U.S.C. § 1659 (attack upon a vessel with intent to plunder)18 U.S.C. § 1654 (Americans arming or serving on privateers outside the United States to be used against the United States or Americans)18 U.S.C. § 1801 (video voyeurism)18 U.S.C. § 1957 (prohibited monetary transactions)18 U.S.C. § 2111 (robbery)18 U.S.C. § 2191 (cruelty to seamen)18 U.S.C. § 2192 (incite to revolt or mutiny)18 U.S.C. § 2193 (revolt or mutiny by seamen)18 U.S.C. § 2194 (shanghaiing sailors)18 U.S.C. § 2195 (abandonment of sailors overseas)18 U.S.C. § 2196 (drunkenness of seamen)18 U.S.C. § 2197 (misuse of documents associated vessels)18 U.S.C. § 2198 (seduction of a female passenger)18 U.S.C. § 2199 (stowaways)18 U.S.C. § 2241 (aggravated sexual abuse)18 U.S.C. § 2242 (sexual abuse)18 U.S.C. § 2243 (sexual abuse of a minor or ward)18 U.S.C. § 2244 (abusive sexual contact)18 U.S.C. § 2252(a) (sale or possession of material involving sexual exploitation of children)18 U.S.C. § 2252A(a) (sale or possession of child pornography)18 U.S.C. § 2261 (interstate domestic violence)18 U.S.C. § 2261A (stalking)18 U.S.C. § 2262 (interstate violation of a protective order)18 U.S.C. §§ 2271-2279 (destruction of ships)18 U.S.C. § 2283 (transportation of explosives, biological, chemical, radioactive or nuclear materials for terrorist purposes on the high seas or aboard a U.S. vessel or in U.S. waters)18 U.S.C.
§ 2284 (transportation of a terrorist on the high seas or aboard a U.S. vessel or in U.S. waters)18 U.S.C. § 2318 (transporting counterfeit phonorecord labels, copies of computer programs or documentation, or copies of motion pictures or other audio visual works)18 U.S.C. § 2332b (acts of terrorism transcending national boundaries)18 U.S.C. § 2388 (war-time activities affecting armed forces)18 U.S.C. § 2422(b) (causing a minor to engage in prostitution or other sexual acts)18 U.S.C. § 2425 (transmission of information about a minor)18 U.S.C. § 3261 (offenses committed by members of the United States armed forces or individuals accompanying or employed by the United States armed forces overseas)46 U.S.C. § 70503 (maritime drug law enforcement)46 U.S.C. § 70508 (operation of stateless submersible vessels)48 U.S.C. § 1912 (offenses committed on United States defense sites in the Marshall Islands or Federated States of Micronesia)48 U.S.C. § 1934 (offenses committed on United States defense sites in Palau)18 U.S.C. § 32 (destruction of aircraft)18 U.S.C. § 831 (threats, theft, or unlawful possession of nuclear material or attempting or conspiring to do so)18 U.S.C. § 1201 (kidnaping)18 U.S.C. § 2318 (transporting counterfeit phonorecord labels, copies of computer programs or documentation, or copies of motion pictures or other audio visual works)49 U.S.C. § 46502(a) (air piracy or attempted air piracy)49 U.S.C. § 46504 (interference with flight crew or attendants within the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States)49 U.S.C. § 46506 (assaults, maiming, theft, receipt of stolen property, murder, manslaughter, attempted murder or manslaughter, robbery, or sexual abuse)18 U.S.C. § 32(b)Offenses :- violence aboard a foreign civil aircraft (likely to endanger the safety of the aircraft) while in flight;- destruction of or incapacitating or endangering damage to foreign civil aircraft;- placing a bomb aboard a foreign civil aircraft; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors:- a United States national was on board;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C.
§ 37Offenses :- violence causing or likely to cause serious bodily injury or death at an international airport;- destruction of or serious damage to aircraft or facilities at an international airport; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- a victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 112Offenses :- assaulting an internationally protected person;- threatening an internationally protected person; or- attempting to threaten an internationally protected personJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 175Offenses :- develop, produce, stockpile, transfer, acquire, retain, or possess biological weapons or delivery systems, misuse of biological weapons;- assisting a foreign power to do so; or- attempting, threatening or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factor :- "there is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section committed by or against a national of the United States," 18 U.S.C. §175(a)18 U.S.C. § 229Offenses :- using chemical weapons outside the United States; or- attempting, or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the victim or offender was a United States national; or- the offense was committed against federal property18 U.S.C. § 831Offenses :- threats, theft, or unlawful possession of nuclear material; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- a United States national or an American legal entity was the victim of the offense;- the offender was a United States national or an American legal entity; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States;- the offense involved a transfer to or from the United States; or- the offense was a threat directed against the United States18 U.S.C. § 832Offenses :-participating in nuclear and weapons of mass destruction threats to the United StatesJurisdiction ;"There is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C. § 732(b) 18 U.S.C.
§ 878Offenses :- threatening to assault, kill or kidnap an internationally protected personJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1091Offense : genocide- killing members of a national, ethnic, racial or religious group- assaulting members of a national, ethnic, racial or religious group- imposing reproductive and other group destructive measures on a national, ethnic, racial or religiousgroup- forcibly transferring children of a national, ethnic, racial or religious groupJurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national- the offender is a stateless person habitually residing in the United States- the offender is present in the United States- the offense occurred in part in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1116Offense : killing an internationally protected personJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1117Offense : conspiracy to kill an internationally protected personJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1201Offense :- kidnaping an internationally protected person; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1203Offense :- hostage taking; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 2280Offenses :- violence committed against maritime navigation; or- attempting or conspiracy to commit violence against maritime navigationJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C.
§ 2280 aOffenses :- violence committed against maritime navigation involving weapons of mass destruction; or- attempting or conspiracy to commit violence against maritime navigation involving weapons of mass destructionJurisdictional factors :- committed aboard or against United States vessel or vessel subject to United States jurisdiction;- the offender was a United States national;- a United States national was seized, threatened, injured, or killed;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2281Offenses :- violence committed against a maritime platform; or- attempting or conspiracy to commit violence against a maritime platformJurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2281aOffenses :- additional offenses committed against a maritime platform; or- attempting or conspiracy to commit additional offenses against a maritime platformJurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national; - a United States national was seized, threatened, injured, or killed;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2332aOffenses :- using a weapon of mass destruction outside the United States; or- threatening, attempting, or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offense was committed against federal property18 U.S.C. § 2332f (effective upon the terrorist bombing convention entering into force for the U.S.)Offenses :- bombing public places, government facilities, or public utilities outside the United States; or- threatening, attempting, or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offense was committed against federal property;- the offender is present in the United States;- the offense was committed on United States registered vessel or aircraft; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C.
§ 2332g Offenses :- producing, acquiring, or possessing anti-aircraft missiles; or- threatening, attempting, or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offense was committed against federal property;- the offender aids or abets the commission of the offense 18 U.S.C. § 2332h Offenses :- producing, acquiring, or possessing radiological dispersal devices; or- threatening, attempting, or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offense was committed against federal property;- the offender aids or abets the commission of the offense 18 U.S.C. § 2332i)Offenses :- acts of nuclear terrorism; or- threatening, attempting, or conspiring to commit such actsJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offense was committed against federal property;- the offender is found in the United States- the offense was committed on United 18 U.S.C. § 2339COffenses :- financing terrorism outside the U.S.; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- predicate act of terrorism was directed against+ United States property,+ United States nationals or their property, or+ property of entities organized under United States law;- offense was committed on United States registered vessel or aircraft operated by the United States.;- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States;- the offender was a United States national; or- (effective upon the terrorism financing convention entering into force for the U.S.) the offender is present in the United States18 U.S.C. § 2340AOffenses :- torture under color of law outside the United States; or- attempted tortureJurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is present in the United States18 U.S.C. § 2441Offense :- war crimesJurisdictional factors :- an American or member of the American armed forces was the victim of the offense; or- the offender was an American or member of the American armed forces49 U.S.C.
§ 46502(b)Offenses :- air piracy outside the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States; or- attempted air piracy outside the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United StatesJurisdictional factors :- a United States national was aboard;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. §38 (fraud involving aircraft or space vehicle parts)Jurisdictional factors:- the offender was a United States national;- the offender was an entity organized under the laws of the United States;- United States national or entity owned aircraft or vehicle to which the part related; or- an act in furtherance of the offense was committed in the United States18 U.S.C. § 175c (variola virus (small pox))Jurisdictional factors :- the offender or victim was a United States national;- the offense occurred in or affected interstate or foreign commerce- the offense was committed against U.S. property; or- the offender aided or abetted the commission of an offense under the section for which there was extraterritorial jurisdictionAttempt/conspiracy- includes attempts and conspiracies18 U.S.C. § 351Offenses :- killing, kidnaping, attempting or conspiring to kill or kidnap, or assaulting a Member of Congress, a Supreme Court Justice, or senior executive branch officialJurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial jurisdiction over an offense prohibited by this section," 18 U.S.C. 351(i)18 U.S.C. § 877 (mailing threatening communications to the United States from foreign countries)18 U.S.C. § 956 (conspiracy and overt act within the United States to commit murder, kidnaping, maiming or the destruction of certain property overseas)18 U.S.C. § 1029Offenses :- fraud related to access devices; or- attempting or conspiring to commit the offenseJurisdictional factors :- involves a device issued, managed or controlled by an entity within the jurisdiction of the United States and- item used in the offense or proceeds are transported or transmitted to or through the United States or deposited here, 18 U.S.C. 1029(h)18 U.S.C. § 1119 (killing of American by an American in a foreign country)18 U.S.C. § 1204 (parental kidnaping by retaining a child outside the United States)18 U.S.C.
§ 1512Offenses :- tampering with a federal witness or informant; or- attempting to tamper with a federal witness or informantJurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C. 1512(g)18 U.S.C. § 1513Offenses :- retaliating against a federal witness or informant; or- attempting to retaliate against a federal witness or informantJurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C. 1513(d)18 U.S.C. § 1585 (service aboard a slave vessel by an American or American resident)18 U.S.C. § 1586 (service aboard a vessel transporting slaves from one foreign country to another by an American or American resident)18 U.S.C. § 1587 (captain of a slave vessel hovering off the coast of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 1596Offenses:- peonage (18 U.S.C. 1581)- enticement into slavery (18 U.S.C. 1583)- sale into involuntary servitude (18 U.S.C. 1584)- forced labor (18 U.S.C. 1589)- trafficking in re peonage, slavery, involuntary servitude, or forced labor (18 U.S.C. 1590)- sex trafficking (18 U.S.C. 1591)Jurisdictional factors:- the offender is a United States national- the offender is found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1651 (piracy upon the high seas where the offender is afterwards brought into or found in the United States)18 U.S.C. § 1652 (Americans acting as privateers against the United States or Americans on the high seas)18 U.S.C. § 1653 (acts of piracy upon the high seas committed against the United States or Americans by aliens)18 U.S.C. § 1654 (Americans arming or serving on privateers outside the United States to be used against the United States or Americans)18 U.S.C. § 1751Offenses :- killing, kidnaping, attempting or conspiring to kill or kidnap, or assaulting the President, Vice President, or a senior White House officialJurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial jurisdiction over an offense prohibited by this section," 18 U.S.C. 1751(k)18 U.S.C. §§ 1831-1839Offenses :- economic espionage;- theft of trade secretsJurisdictional factors :- "[t]his chapter also applies to conduct occurring outside the United States if"(1) the offender was a United States national or entity organized under United States law; or(2) an act in furtherance was committed here, 18 U.S.C. 183718 U.S.C.
§ 1956Offense :- money launderingJurisdictional factors : "[t]here is extraterritorial jurisdiction over the conduct prohibited by this section if- the conduct is by a United States citizen or, in the case of a non-United States citizen, the conduct occurs in part in the United States; and- the transaction or series of related transactions involves funds... of a value exceeding $10,000," 18 U.S.C. §1956(f)18 U.S.C. § 1957Offense :- prohibited monetary transactionsJurisdictional factors :- the offense under this section takes place outside the United States, but the defendant is a United States person [other than a federal employee or contractor who is the victim of terrorism]," 18 U.S.C. 1957(d)18 U.S.C. § 1992 (attacks on railroad and mass transit systems engaged in interstate or foreign commerce)18 U.S.C. §§ 2151 - 2157 (sabotage)(definitions afford protection for armed forces of the United States and "any associate nation" and for things transported "either within the limits of the United States or upon the high seas or elsewhere," 18 U.S.C. §2151)18 U.S.C. § 2260 (production of sexually explicit depictions of children outside the United States with the intent to import into the United States)18 U.S.C. § 2285 (operation of submersible vessel or semi-submersible vessel without nationality)Jurisdictional factors : "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section, including attempt or conspiracy to commit such an offense"18 U.S.C. § 2290Offenses :- destruction of vessels or maritime facilities (18 U.S.C. §2291); - attempting or conspiring to do so (18 U.S.C. §2291); or- imparting or conveying false information (18 U.S.C. §2292)Jurisdictional factors :- victim or offender was a U.S. national;- U.S. national was aboard victim vessel;- victim vessel was a U.S. vesselAttempt/conspiracy- includes attempts and conspiracies18 U.S.C. § 2332 (killing, attempting or conspiring to kill, or assaulting Americans overseas) (prosecution upon Department of Justice certification of terrorist intent)18 U.S.C. § 2332bOffenses :- terrorist acts transcending national boundaries; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- use of U.S.
mail or other facility of United States foreign commerce;- affects foreign commerce of the United States;- victim was federal officer or employee or United States government; or- the offense was committed within the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the United States18 U.S.C. § 2339BOffenses :- providing material support or resources to designated terrorist organizations by one "subject to the jurisdiction of the United States;" or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C. §2339B(d)18 U.S.C. § 2339D (receipt of military training from a foreign terrorist organization)Jurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national;- the offender was habitual resident of the United States;- the offender is present in the United States;- the offense was committed in part in the United States;- the offense occurred in or affected interstate or foreign commerce; or- the offender aided or abetted a violation of the section over which extraterritorial jurisdiction exists18 U.S.C. § 2381 (treason) ("within the United States or elsewhere")18 U.S.C. § 2423 (U.S. citizen or resident alien traveling overseas with the intent to commit illicit sexual activity or traveling overseas and thereafter engaging in illicit sexual activity)18 U.S.C. § 2442 (recruitment or use of child soldiers)Jurisdictional factors:- the offender was a United States national- the offender was a stateless person habitually residing in the United States- the offender is present in the United States- the offense occurred in part in the United States18 U.S.C. § 3271 (overseas transportation of illicit sexual purposes or overseas trafficking in persons—by those employed by or accompanying the United States)21 U.S.C. §337aOffenses:-violations of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic ActJurisdictional factors:- the offense involved an article intended for import into the United States- an act in furtherance of the offense was committed in the United States21 U.S.C. § 959Offenses :- manufacture, distribution or possession of illicit drugs for importation into the United StatesJurisdictional factors :- "this section is intended to reach acts of manufacture or distribution committed outside the territorial jurisdiction of the United States ..." 21 U.S.C. §959(c)21 U.S.C. § 960A (narco-terrorism)Jurisdictional factors :- the offense was a U.S.
drug or terrorism offense;- the offender provided pecuniary value for terrorist offense to injure a U.S. national or damage U.S. property outside the United States;- the offense was committed in part in the United States and the offender is a U.S. national; or- the offense occurred in or affected interstate or foreign commerce46 U.S.C. § § 70503Offenses :- manufacture, distribution or possession of controlled substances on various vessels outside United States maritime jurisdictionJurisdictional factors :- the vessel is a "vessel without nationality"; or- the vessel is of foreign registry or located within foreign territorial waters and the foreign nation has consented to application of the United States law50 U.S.C. §§3121, 3124Offense:- Unlawful disclosure of classified informationJurisdictional factor : - the offender is a U.S. citizen or permanent resident alien 18 U.S.C. § 32 (death resulting from destruction of aircraft or their facilities)Jurisdictional factors :- aircraft was in the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States;- the victim or offender was a United States national; or- the offender is found in the United StatesAttempt/Conspiracyattempt and conspiracy are included18 U.S.C. § 37 (death resulting from violence at international airports)Jurisdictional factors :- a victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 38 (death resulting from fraud involving aircraft or space vehicle parts)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim or offender was an entity organized under United States law;- the victim or offender was a United States national; or- an act in furtherance of the offense was committed in the United States)18 U.S.C. § 43Offense (where death results) :- travel to disrupt an animal enterprise;- causing damages of over $10,000 to an animal enterprise; or- conspiring to cause damages of over $10,000 to an animal enterpriseJurisdictional factors :- the offense involved travel in the foreign commerce of the United States; or- the offense involved use of the mails or other facility in the foreign commerce of the United States18 U.S.C. § 175 (death resulting from biological weapons offenses)Jurisdictional factors :- a victim was a United States national; or- the offender was a United States national18 U.S.C.
§ 175c (variola virus (small pox))Jurisdictional factors :- the offender or victim was a United States national;- the offense occurred in or affected interstate or foreign commerce;- the offense was committed against U.S. property; or- the offender aided or abetted the commission of an offense under the section for which there was extraterritorial jurisdiction18 U.S.C. § 229 (death resulting from chemical weapons offenses)Jurisdictional factors :- a victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- committed against United States property18 U.S.C. § 351 (killing a Member of Congress, cabinet officer, or Supreme Court justice)Attempt/conspiracyattempt and conspiracy are included18 U.S.C. § 831Offenses :- unlawful possession of nuclear material where the offender causes the death of another; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the offense is committed within the special aircraft or special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States;- a United States national or an American legal entity was the victim of the offense;- the offender was a United States national or an American legal entity; - the offender is afterwards found in the United States;- the offense involved a transfer to or from the United States; or- the offense was a threat directed against the United States18 U.S.C. § 956 (conspiracy and overt act within the United States to commit murder, kidnaping, maiming or the destruction of certain property overseas)18 U.S.C. § 1091 (genocide)Jurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national- the offender is a stateless person habitually residing in the United States- the offender is present in the United States- the offense occurred in part in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1111 (murder within the special maritime jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 1112 (manslaughter within the special maritime jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 1113 (attempted murder or manslaughter within the special maritime jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 1116 (killing an internationally protected person)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C.
§ 1117 (conspiracy to kill an internationally protected person)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1119 (a United States national killing or attempting to kill a United States national outside the United States)18 U.S.C. § 1201 (kidnaping where death results)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim is removed from the United States;- the offense occurs within the special aircraft or special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States;- the victim is a federal officer or employee; or- the victim is an internationally protected person and+ the victim was a United States national;+ the offender was a United States national; or+ the offender is afterwards found in the United StatesAttempt/conspiracyattempt and conspiracy are included18 U.S.C. § 1203 (hostage taking where death results)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United StatesAttempt/conspiracyattempt and conspiracy are included1 8 U.S.C. § 1512 (tampering with a federal witness or informant where death results)Jurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C.1512(g)Attempt/conspiracyattempt is included18 U.S.C. § 1513 (retaliating against a federal witness or informant)Jurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C.1513(d))Attempt/conspiracyattempt is included18 U.S.C. § 1652 (murder of an American by an American on the high seas in the name of a foreign state or person)18 U.S.C. § 1751 (killing the President, Vice President, or a senior White House official)Jurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial jurisdiction over an offense prohibited by this section," 18 U.S.C.1751(k)Attempt/conspiracyattempt and conspiracy are included18 U.S.C. §§ 2241, 2245 (aggravated sexual abuse within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States where death results)18 U.S.C. §§ 2242, 2245 (sexual abuse within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States where death results)18 U.S.C. §§ 2243, 2245 (sexual abuse of a minor or ward within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States where death results)18 U.S.C.
§ 831Offenses :- unlawful use of nuclear material where the offender causes the serious injury to another; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the offense is committed within the special aircraft or special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States;- a United States national or an American legal entity was the victim of the offense;- the offender was a United States national or an American legal entity; - the offender is afterwards found in the United States;- the offense involved a transfer to or from the United States; or- the offense was a threat directed against the United States18 U.S.C. § 956 (conspiracy and overt act within the United States to commit murder, kidnaping, maiming or the destruction of certain property overseas)18 U.S.C. § 1091( genocide)- assaulting members of a national, ethnic, racial or religious group- forcibly transferring children of a national, ethnic, racial or religious groupJurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national- the offender is a stateless person habitually residing in the United States- the offender is present in the United States- the offense occurred in part in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1512 (tampering with a federal witness or informant through the use of physical force)Jurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C.1512(g)Attempt/conspiracyattempt is included18 U.S.C. § 1513Offenses (causing physical injury) :- retaliating against a federal witness or informant; or- attempting to retaliate against a federal witness or informantJurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C.1513(d))18 U.S.C. § 1655 (assaulting the commander of a vessel is piracy)18 U.S.C. § 1751 (assaulting the President, Vice President, or a senior White House official; "[t]here is extraterritorial jurisdiction over an offense prohibited by this section," 18 U.S.C.1751(k))18 U.S.C. § 2191 (cruelty to seamen within the special maritime jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 2194 (shanghaiing sailors for employment within the foreign commerce of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 2241 (aggravated sexual abuse within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C.
§ 2242 (sexual abuse within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 2243 (sexual abuse of a minor or ward within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 2244 (abusive sexual contact within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 2261A (stalking within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 2280Offenses :- violence committed against maritime navigation; or- attempting or conspiracy to commit violence against maritime navigationJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2281Offenses:- violence committed against a maritime platform; or- attempting or conspiracy to commit violence against a maritime platformJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2332 (assaulting a United States national outside the United States) (prosecution upon Department of Justice certification of terrorist intent)18 U.S.C. § 2332aOffenses :- using a weapon of mass destruction outside the United States resulting physical injury; or- attempting or conspiring to do soJurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offense was committed against federal property18 U.S.C. § 2332bOffenses :- terrorist assaults transcending national boundaries; or- attempt or conspiracyJurisdictional factors :- use of United States mail or other facility of United States foreign commerce;- affects foreign commerce of the United States;- victim was federal officer or employee or United States government; or- the offense was committed within the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the United States18 U.S.C. § 2340AOffenses :- torture under color of law outside the United States; or- attempted tortureJurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is present in the United States18 U.S.C.
§ 3261 (offenses committed by members of the United States armed forces or individuals accompanying or employed by the United States armed forces overseas)46 U.S.C. § 11501 (seaman's assault upon officers within the special maritime jurisdiction of the United States)49 U.S.C. § 46504 (assaulting a flight crew member within the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States)49 U.S.C. § 46506 (assaults within the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 32 (destruction of aircraft or their facilities)Jurisdictional factors :- aircraft was in the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States;- the victim or offender was a United States national; or- the offender is found in the United StatesAttempt/Conspiracyattempt and conspiracy are included18 U.S.C. § 33 (destruction of motor vehicles or their facilities used in United States foreign commerce)18 U.S.C. § 37 (violence at international airports)Jurisdictional factors :- a victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 81 (arson within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 229 (chemical weapons damage)Jurisdictional factors :- a victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- committed against United States property18 U.S.C. § 831 ( use nuclear material of damage or destroy)Jurisdictional factors :- committed within the special aircraft or special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States- a United States national or an American legal entity was the victim of the offense;- the offender was a United States national or an American legal entity; - the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense involved a transfer to or from the United States18 U.S.C. § 956 (conspiracy and overt act within the United States to commit murder, kidnaping, maiming or the destruction of certain property overseas)18 U.S.C. § 1030 (computer abuse involving damage to federal or United States financial systems or systems used in the foreign commerce or communications of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 1363 (destruction of property within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C.
§ 2272 (destruction of a vessel within the maritime jurisdiction of the United States by its owner)18 U.S.C. § 2273 (destruction of a vessel within the maritime jurisdiction of the United States by others)18 U.S.C. § 2275 (burning or tampering with a vessel within the maritime jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 2280 (destruction of maritime navigational facilities)Jurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2281 (damage to a maritime platform)Jurisdictional factors :- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2290Offenses :- destruction of vessels or maritime facilities (18 U.S.C. 2291); or- attempting or conspiring to do so (18 U.S.C. 2291)Jurisdictional factors :- victim or offender was a United States national;- United States national was aboard victim vessel;- victim vessel was a United States vessel18 U.S.C. § 2332a (using a weapon of mass destruction)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offense was committed against federal property18 U.S.C. § 2332f (effective upon the terrorist bombing convention entering into force for the U.S.) (bombing public places, government facilities, or public utilities outside the United States)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offense was committed against federal property;- the offender is present in the United States;- the offense was committed on United States registered vessel or aircraft; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 3261 (offenses committed by members of the United States armed forces or individuals accompanying or employed by the United States armed forces overseas)18 U.S.C. § 32 (threats to destroy foreign civil aircraft, or aircraft in the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States, or aircraft or aircraft facilities in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C.
§ 112 (threatening internationally protected person)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 175 (threatening to develop, produce, stockpile, transfer, acquire, retain, or possess biological weapons or delivery systems, misuse of biological weapons; or threatening to assisting a foreign power to do so; "there is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section committed by or against a national of the United States," 18 U.S.C.175(a)18 U.S.C. § 229 (threatening to use chemical weapons)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim or offender was a United States national; or- the offense was committed against federal property18 U.S.C. § 831 (threaten to use nuclear material of injury or destroy)Jurisdictional factors :- committed within the special aircraft or special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States;- a United States national or an American legal entity was the victim of the offense;- the offender was a United States national or an American legal entity; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States;- the offense involved a transfer to or from the United States; or- the offense was a threat directed against the United States18 U.S.C. § 875 (transmission of a threat in the foreign commerce of the United States)18 U.S.C. § 877 (mailing a threat to kidnap or injure from a foreign country to the United States)18 U.S.C. § 878 (threatening to kill, kidnap or assault an internationally protected person)Jurisdictional factors :- a victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offender is afterwards found in the United States18 U.S.C. § 1203 (threaten to kill or injure a hostage outside the United States)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 1512 (threatening a federal witness or informant)Jurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C.1512(g)18 U.S.C.
§ 1513 (threatening to retaliate against a federal witness or informant)Jurisdictional factors :- "[t]here is extraterritorial Federal jurisdiction over an offense under this section," 18 U.S.C. §1513(d))18 U.S.C. § 2280 (threats of violence against maritime navigation)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2281 (threatens injury or destruction aboard a fixed maritime platform)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offender is afterwards found in the United States; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States18 U.S.C. § 2290Offenses :- destruction of vessels or maritime facilities (18 U.S.C. §2291); or- attempting or conspiring to do so (18 U.S.C. §2291)Jurisdictional factors :- victim or offender was a United States national;- United States national was aboard victim vessel;- victim vessel was a United States vessel18 U.S.C. § 2332a (threatening to use a weapon of mass destruction)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national; or- the offense was committed against federal property18 U.S.C. § 2332f (effective upon the terrorist bombing convention entering into force for the U.S.) (threatening to bomb public places, government facilities, or public utilities outside the United States)Jurisdictional factors :- the victim was a United States national;- the offender was a United States national;- the offense was committed against federal property;- the offender is present in the United States;- the offense was committed on United States registered vessel or aircraft; or- the offense was intended to compel action or abstention by the United States49 U.S.C. § 46507 (threats or scares concerning air piracy or bombing aircraft in the special aircraft jurisdiction of the United States)18 U.S.C.
Limitations on Jurisdiction to Prescribe(1) Even when one of the bases for jurisdiction under §402 is present, a state may not exercise jurisdiction to prescribe law with respect to a person or activity having connections with another state when the exercise of such jurisdiction is unreasonable.(2) Whether exercise of jurisdiction over a person or activity is unreasonable is determined by evaluating all relevant factors, including, where appropriate:(a) the link of the activity to the territory of the regulating state, i.e., the extent to which the activity takes place within the territory, or has substantial, direct, and foreseeable effect upon or in the territory;(b) the connections, such as nationality, residence, or economic activity, between the regulating state and the person principally responsible for the activity to be regulated, or between that state and those whom the regulation is designed to protect;(c) the character of the activity to be regulated, the importance of regulation to the regulating state, the extent to which other states regulate such activities, and the degree to which the desirability of such regulation is generally accepted;(d) the existence of justified expectations that might be protected or hurt by the regulation;(e) the importance of the regulation to the international political, legal, or economic system;(f) the extent to which the regulation is consistent with the traditions of the international system;(g) the extent to which another state may have an interest in regulating the activity; and(h) the likelihood of conflict with regulation by another state.(3) When it would not be unreasonable for each of two states to exercise jurisdiction over a person or activity, but the prescriptions by the two states are in conflict, each state has an obligation to evaluate its own as well as the other state's interest in exercising jurisdiction, in light of all the relevant factors, Subsection (2); a state should defer to the other state if that state's interest is clearly greater.§404.
Jurisdiction to Adjudicate(1) A state may exercise jurisdiction through its courts to adjudicate with respect to a person or thing if the relationship of the state to the person or thing is such as to make the exercise of jurisdiction reasonable.(2) In general, a state's exercise of jurisdiction to adjudicate with respect to a person or thing is reasonable if, at the time jurisdiction is asserted:(a) the person or thing is present in the territory of the state, other than transitorily;(b) the person, if a natural person, is domiciled in the state;(c) the person, if a natural person, is resident in the state;(d) the person, if a natural person, is a national of the state;(e) the person, if a corporation or comparable juridical person, is organized pursuant to the law of the state;(f) a ship, aircraft, or other vehicle to which the adjudication relates is registered under the laws of the state;(g) the person, whether natural or juridical, has consented to the exercise of jurisdiction;(h) the person, whether natural or juridical, regularly carries on business in the state;(i) the person, whether natural or juridical, had carried on activity in the state, but only in respect to such activity;(j) the person, whether natural or juridical, had carried on outside the state an activity having a substantial, direct, and foreseeable effect within the state, but only in respect to such activity; or(k) the thing that is the subject of adjudication is owned, possessed, or used in the state, but only in respect to a claim reasonably connected with that thing.(3) A defense of lack of jurisdiction is generally waived by any appearance by or on behalf of a person or thing (whether as plaintiff, defendant, or third party), if the appearance is for a purpose that does not include a challenge to the exercise of jurisdiction.§431.
Cherif Bassiouni, International extradition: United States Law and Practice (6 th ed. 2014)Christopher L. Blakesley, A Conceptual Framework for Extradition and Jurisdiction Over Extraterritorial Crimes , 1984 Utah L. Rev. 685Christopher L. Blakesley & Stigall, The Myopia of U.S. v. Martinelli: Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in the 21 st Century , 39 Geo. Wash. Int'l L. Rev. 1 (2007)Gary B. Born, Reappraisal of the Extraterritorial Reach of United States Law , 24 Law & Pol'y Int'l Bus. 1 (1992)Curtis A. Bradley, Universal Jurisdiction and United States Law , 2001 U. Chi. Legal F. 323Lea Brilmayer & Charles Norchi, Federal Extraterritoriality and Fifth Amendment Due Process , 105 Harv. L. Rev. 1217 (1992)Jose A. Cabranes, Our Imperial Criminal Procedure: Problems in the Extraterritorial Application of U.S. Constitutional Law , 118 Yale L. J. 1660 (2009) Zachary D. Clopton, Bowman Lives: The Extraterritorial Application of U.S. Criminal Law After Morrison v. National Australia Bank , 67 NYU Ann. Surv. Am. L. 137 (2011)______, Replacing the Presumption Against Extraterritoriality , 94 B.U. L. Rev. 1 (2014)Anthony J. Colangelo, Unified Approach to Extraterritoriality , 97 Va. L. Rev. 1019 (2011)______, What is Extraterritorial Jurisdiction, 99 Cornell L. Rev. 1303 (2014)Jenny-Brooke Condon, Extraterritorial Interrogation: The Porous Border Between Torture and U.S. Criminal Trials , 60 Rutgers L. Rev. 647 (2008)[author name scrubbed], Substantive Due Process and U.S. Jurisdiction Over Foreign Nationals , 82 Fordham L. Rev. 2077 (2014)Brandon L. Garrett, Globalized Corporate Prosecutions , 97 Va. L. Rev. 1775 (2011)B.J. George, Jr., Extraterritorial Application of Penal Legislation , 64 Michigan Law Review 609 (1966)Joseph P. Griffin, Foreign Governmental Reactions to United States Assertions of Extraterritorial Jurisdiction , 6 Geo. Mason L. Rev. 505 (1998)Harvard Research in International Law, Jurisdiction With Respect to Crime , 72 Am. J. Int'l L. (Supp.) 485 (1935)David Keenan & Sabrina P. Shroff, Taking the Presumption Against Extraterritoriality Seriously in Criminal Cases After Morrison and Kiobel, 45 Loy. U. Chi. L.J. 71 (2013)Eugene Kontorovich, Beyond the Article I Horizon: Congress's Enumerated Powers and Universal Jurisdiction Over Drug Crimes , 93 Minn. L. Rev. 1191 (2009)____, The "Define and Punish" Clause and the Limits of Universal Jurisdiction , 103 Nw. U. L. Rev.
149 (2009)Margaret K. Lewis, When Foreign is Criminal , 55 Va. J. Int'l L. 625 (2015)Jeffrey A. Meyer, Dual Illegality and Geoambiguous Law: A New Rule for Extraterritorial Application of U.S. Law , 95 Minn. L. Rev. 110 (2010)Austen Parrish, The Effects Test: Extraterritoriality's Fifth Business , 61 Vand. L. Rev. 1455 (2008)Paust, Non-Extraterritoriality of "Special Territorial Jurisdiction" of the United States: Forgotten History and the Errors of Erdos , 24 Yale Journal of International Law 305 (1999)Ellen S. Podgor, Globalization and the Federal Prosecution of White Collar Crime , 34 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 325 (1997)___, International Computer Fraud: A Paradigm for Limiting National Jurisdiction, 35 U. Cal. Davis L. Rev. 267 (2002)Ellen S. Podgor & Daniel M. Filler, International Criminal Jurisdiction in the Twenty-First Century: Rediscovering United States v. Bowman , 44 San Diego L. Rev. 585 (2007)Kenneth C. Randall, Universal Jurisdiction Under International Law , 66 Tex. L. Rev. 785 (1988)Thomas G. Snow, The Investigation and Prosecution of White Collar Crime: International Challenges and the Legal Tools Available to Address Them , 11 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 209 (2002)Paul N. Stockton & Michele Golabek-Goldman, Prosecuting Cyberterrorists: Applying Traditional Frameworks to a Modern Threat , 25 Stan. L. & Pol'y Rev. 211 (2014)Frank Tuerkheimer, Globalization of United States Law Enforcement: Does the Constitution Come Along? 39 Hous. L. Rev. 307 (2002)United States Congress, Legislative Initiatives to Curb Domestic and International Terrorism; Hearings Before the Subcomm. on Security and Terrorism of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary , 98 th Cong., 2d Sess. (1984)___, Bills to Authorize Prosecution of Terrorists and Others Who Attack United States Government Employees and Citizens Abroad: Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Security and Terrorism of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary , 99 th Cong., 1 st Sess. (1985)___, Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Over Terrorists Acts Abroad: Hearings Before Subcomm. on Crime of House Comm. on Judiciary , 101 st Cong., 1 st Sess. (1989)Johan D. van der Vyver, Prosecuting Offenses Against the Law of Nations in the United States , 20 Emory Int'l L. Rev. 473 (2006)David P.
Since the creation of the modern U.S. intelligence community after World War II, neither Congress nor the executive branch has made public the total extent of intelligence spending except for two fiscal years in the 1990s. Rather, intelligence programs and personnel have largely been contained, but not identified, within the capacious expanse of the budget of the Department of Defense (DOD). This practice has long been criticized by proponents of open government. The intelligence reform effort of the mid-1970s that led to greater involvement of Congress in the oversight of the Intelligence Community also generated a number of proposals to make public the amounts spent on intelligence activities. Many observers subsequently argued that the end of the Cold War further reduced the need to keep secret the aggregate amount of intelligence spending. According to this view, with the dissolution of the Soviet Union, there are few foreign countries that can take advantage of information about trends in U.S. intelligence spending to develop effective countermeasures. Terrorist organizations, it is argued, lack the capability of exploiting total intelligence spending data.In recent years, proposals for making public overall totals of intelligence spending have come under renewed consideration. In 1991 and 1992 legislation was enacted that stated the "sense of the Congress" that "the aggregate amount requested and authorized for, and spent on, intelligence and intelligence-related activities should be disclosed to the public in an appropriate manner." Nevertheless, both the House and the Senate voted in subsequent years not to require a release of intelligence spending data. During the Clinton Administration, Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) George Tenet twice took the initiative to release total figures for appropriations for intelligence and intelligence-related activities. Despite the release of data for fiscal years 1997 and 1998, however, no subsequent appropriations levels have been made public.The issue has not, however, died. The 9/11 Commission, in its final report, recommended that "the overall amounts [or the "top line"] of money being appropriated for national intelligence and to its component agencies should no longer be kept secret.
Congress should pass a separate appropriations act for intelligence, defending the broad allocation of how these tens of billions of dollars have been assigned among the varieties of intelligence work." A number of proposals for Intelligence reform legislation in 2004 included provisions for making the budget public, but the legislation ultimately enacted as the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108-458 ) [hereafter referred to as the Intelligence Reform Act] did not include provisions for making budget numbers public. More recently, the FY2007 Intelligence Authorization legislation ( S. 372 ) reported in the Senate in January 2007 would require publication of budget totals for national, but not tactical, intelligence programs.This report describes the constituent parts of the intelligence budget, past practice in handling intelligence authorizations and appropriations, the arguments that have been advanced for and against making intelligence spending totals public, a legal analysis of these issues, and a review of the implications of post-Cold War developments on the question. It also describes past congressional interest in keeping intelligence spending totals secret.The meaning of the term "intelligence budget" is not easily described. Although some may assume it is equivalent to the budget of the Central Intelligence Agency, in actuality it encompasses a wide variety of agencies and functions in various parts of the Federal Government that are involved in intelligence collection, analysis, and dissemination. At the same time, some important information collection efforts (such as reporting by U.S. embassies to the State Department) are not considered as intelligence activities and their funding is not included in the intelligence budget. A further complication, to be addressed below, is the separate category of intelligence-related activities undertaken in DOD that are included in overall intelligence spending categories. For some purposes, it is sufficient to describe intelligence and intelligence-related activities as those authorized by annual intelligence authorization acts.In the context of annual budget reviews, both the executive branch and Congress have sought a comprehensive overview of all intelligence collection systems and activities.
Thus, there emerged the concept of an intelligence community , not a monolithic organization but a grouping of governmental entities ranging in size from the CIA and NSA down to the small intelligence offices of the Treasury and Energy Departments. Except for the CIA, this community consists of components that are integral parts of agencies that are not themselves part of the Intelligence Community and their budgets are subject to separate authorization processes. Thus, for instance, the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research is both part of the Intelligence Community and an organizational component of the Department of State. Its budget is considered as part of the overall intelligence budget and as a component of the State Department budget. Similar situations apply, on a much larger and expensive scale, in the Defense Department. Since these intelligence components are closely tied to their parent departments and share facilities and administrative structure with them, it is not always possible to desegregate intelligence and non-intelligence costs with precision.For the purposes of this discussion, the U.S. "intelligence budget" is considered to consist of those activities authorized by the annual intelligence authorization acts, viz. the intelligence and intelligence-related activities of the following elements of the United States government:(1) the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA);(2) the National Security Agency (NSA);(3) the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA);(4) the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) (formerly the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA));(5) the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO);(6) the intelligence elements of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and the Marine Corps(7) the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR);(8) the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI);(9) the Department of Homeland Security (DHS);(10) the Coast Guard;(11) the Department of the Treasury;(12) the Department of Energy;(13) the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA).The parameters of the intelligence budget are, to some extent, arbitrary. Lines between intelligence and other types of information-gathering efforts can be fine. As noted earlier, reporting by the State Department's Foreign Service Officers is an invaluable adjunct to intelligence collection, but is not considered an intelligence activity.
Similarly, some reconnaissance and surveillance activities, mostly conducted in DOD, are very closely akin to intelligence, but for administrative or historical reasons have never been considered as being intelligence or intelligence-related activities per se .The intelligence budget as authorized by Congress is now divided into two parts, the National Intelligence Program (NIP) and the Military Intelligence Program (MIP). NIP programs (formerly categorized as the National Foreign Intelligence Program (NFIP)) are those undertaken in support of national-level decision making and are conducted by the CIA, DIA, NSA, the NRO, NGA, and other Washington-area agencies. MIP programs are those undertaken by DOD agencies in support of defense policymaking and of military commanders throughout the world. Until September, 2005, there were two sets of programs within DOD—the Joint Military Intelligence Program (JMIP) and Tactical Intelligence and Related Activities (TIARA). JMIP programs, established as a separate category in 1994, supported DOD-wide activities. TIARA programs were defined as "a diverse array of reconnaissance and target acquisition programs which are a functional part of the basic military force structure and provide direct support to military operations." In recent years the overlap among intelligence and intelligence-related activities has grown—satellite photography, for instance, can now be made immediately available to tactical commanders and intelligence acquired at the tactical level is frequently transmitted to national-level agencies. As a result, JMIP and TIARA were combined by the Defense Department into the MIP in September 2005.Within the MIP are programs that formerly constituted the JMIP that support DOD-wide intelligence efforts as well as programs directly supporting military operations that were formerly categorized as TIARA. The relationship of intelligence-related programs to regular intelligence programs is a complex one that is not likely to be understood by many public observers. In 1994, then-DCI R. James Woolsey described them as a "loose amalgamation of activities that may vary from year to year, depending on how the various military services decide what constitutes tactical intelligence." Intelligence-related programs, which may constitute somewhere around a third of total intelligence spending, are integral parts of defense programs; in many cases they are also supported by non-intelligence personnel and facilities.
(The administrative expenses, for instance, of a military base that has intelligence-related missions as well as non-intelligence functions would probably not be included in intelligence accounts.) The role of intelligence-related programs is sometimes misinterpreted in public discussions of the multi-billion dollar intelligence effort.With the passage of the Intelligence Reform Act in 2004, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) has extensive statutory authorities for developing and determining the NIP and for presenting it to the President for approval. The President in turn forwards the NIP to Congress as part of the annual budget submission in January or February of each year. The Office of the DNI (ODNI) serves as the DNI's staff for annual budget preparation and submission. The DNI participates in the development of the MIP by the Secretary of Defense. The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) has the responsibility to "oversee all Defense intelligence budgetary matters to ensure compliance with the budget policies issues by the DNI for the NIP." The USD(I) also serves as Program Executive for the MIP and supervises coordination during the programming, budgeting, and execution cycles. Thus, in the development of both the NIP and the MIP essential roles are played by the Office of the DNI and the office of the USD(I). The two offices have overlapping responsibilities and close coordination is required.Budgeting for secret intelligence efforts has long presented difficult challenges to the Congress. Realizing the need for some direction over the intelligence effort that had been disbanded in the immediate aftermath of World War II, President Truman established, in a directive of January 22, 1946, a coordinative element for intelligence activities, the Central Intelligence Group (CIG), headed by a Director of Central Intelligence, and consisting of representatives from the State, War, and Navy Departments. This was not the creation of a new agency, but a coordinative group; personnel and facilities were to be provided "within the limits of available appropriations." This arrangement was questioned, however, because of concern that specific authorization by Congress would be legally required to make funds available to any agency in existence more than a year.
Thus, it might have been illegal for the CIG to expend funds after January 22, 1947.Shortly after taking office in June, 1946, the second DCI, General Hoyt S. Vandenberg, arranged for the creation of a "working fund" consisting of allotments from the Departments of State, War, and the Navy, under the supervision of the Comptroller General, to cover the costs of the relatively small CIG. It cannot be readily determined if funds were transferred from all three departments; the larger budgets of the War and Navy Departments may have made them more likely contributors than the State Department.Vandenberg, realizing the administrative weakness of this situation, began an effort to obtain congressional approval of an independent intelligence agency with its own budget. The National Security Act of 1947, which created the unified National Defense Establishment, included provisions for a Central Intelligence Agency, headed by a Director of Central Intelligence. It also authorized the transfer of "personnel, property, and records" of the CIG to the new CIA; it did not, however, provide additional statutory language regarding the administration of the CIA. With the creation of the CIA by the National Security Act of 1947, arrangements were made for the continuation of previous funding mechanisms; "[t]he Agency was to conform as nearly as possible to normal procedures until further legislation by Congress should make exceptions fitting the special needs of the Agency."It was recognized that follow-on enabling legislation would be required. After some delays, Congress passed the Central Intelligence Act of 1949 (P.L. 81-110) to provide a firmer statutory base for the CIA and to establish procedures for regular appropriations. This legislation, reported by the two armed services committees, provided authority for the CIA "to transfer to and receive from other Government agencies such sums as may be approved by the Bureau of the Budget [predecessor of today's Office of Management and Budget]...." The 1949 Act also provided that "sums transferred to the [CIA]...
may be expended for the purposes and under the authority of this Act without regard to limitations of appropriations from which transferred...."Representative Carl Vinson, speaking on the floor of the House shortly after passage of the 1949 Act, stated that the legislation contained:the authority to transfer and receive from other Government agencies such sums as may be approved by the Bureau of the Budget for the performance of any of the agency functions. This is how the Central Intelligence Agency gets its money. It has been going on since the agency was created, and this simply legalizes that important function which is the only means by which the amount of money required to operate an efficient intelligence service can be concealed.In practice, the CIA Act of 1949 provides funding for CIA through the defense authorization and appropriation process. Funding for other intelligence activities undertaken by DOD agencies was logically included in defense bills.For many years, authorizations and appropriations for CIA were handled by a relatively small number of Members and staff of the two appropriations committees with consultation with members of the two armed services committees. According to available sources, senior Members of the Appropriations Committees insisted on maintaining the secrecy of the contents of the CIA's budget requests and congressional actions in response. In 1956, subcommittees were created in the Armed Services and Appropriations Committees of each House to oversee the CIA. Many assessments of the practice of congressional oversight of intelligence activities during the Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson Administrations have concluded that the congressional role was in large measure supportive and perfunctory. This view has, however, come under serious challenge and there is considerable evidence that Congress took close interest in intelligence spending, especially in regard to major surveillance systems and the construction of headquarters buildings. The small handful of Members responsible for intelligence oversight had a close working relationship with the CIA.
For a number of years, beginning in the Eisenhower Administration, Senator Richard Russell served both as chairman of the Armed Services Committee and of the Subcommittee on Defense Appropriations and had an especially important influence on intelligence spending.During these Cold War years, intelligence budgets grew considerably in significant part because of efforts to determine the extent of Soviet nuclear capabilities through overhead surveillance by manned aircraft such as the U-2s and reconnaissance satellites, and through a worldwide signals intelligence effort. NSA and DIA emerged as major intelligence agencies with large budgets; other agencies were created to launch satellites and interpret overhead photography. These capabilities, which contributed directly to the design of strategic weapons systems and to the negotiation of strategic arms control agreements with the Soviet Union, cost many billions of dollars. These programs were initiated, funded by Congress, and administered in secrecy and involved a number of intelligence agencies and components of DOD. President Lyndon Johnson said on March 16, 1967:I wouldn't want to be quoted on this but we've spent 35 or 40 billion dollars on the space program. And if nothing else had come out of it except the knowledge we've gained from space photography, it would be worth 10 times what the whole program has cost. Because tonight we know how many missiles the enemy has and, it turned out, our guesses were way off. We were doing things we didn't need to do. We were building things we didn't need to build. We were harboring fears we didn't need to harbor. Because of satellites, I know how many missiles the enemy has.During the Ford Administration, E.O. 11905 of February 18, 1975, consolidated the budget for all intelligence agencies and provided for a comprehensive review of the National Foreign Intelligence Program by the DCI and senior DOD and NSC officials. Subsequent executive orders (most recently E.O. 12333 of December 4, 1981) and the Intelligence Authorization Act for FY1993 ( P.L. 102-496 ) clarified and strengthened the DCI's role. The Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 ( P.L.
108-458 ) gave the newly established position of Director of National Intelligence (DNI) authority to coordinate intelligence activities across the government and to manage the NIP. The DNI has specific responsibilities for developing and determining the annual consolidated NIP budget. The DNI also participates in the development of the MIP which is the responsibility of the Secretary of Defense.A key factor encouraging consolidated review of the intelligence budget has been increasingly detailed oversight by Congress. Efforts in the 1950s and 1960s to establish intelligence committees or to involve a larger number of Members in intelligence oversight were rebuffed, with oversight remaining in the hands of a small number of senior members. This situation was altered in the aftermath of the Vietnam War. In reaction to a series of revelations about allegedly illegal and improper activities by intelligence agencies in 1975, Congress created two (temporary) select committees to investigate the CIA and other intelligence agencies. The Church and Pike Committees investigated a wide range of intelligence issues and conducted well-publicized hearings. Although budgetary issues were not at the heart of the investigations, there emerged a consensus that congressional oversight of intelligence agencies needed to be strengthened and formalized and permanent intelligence committees established. There was also widespread sentiment expressed that more information regarding intelligence agencies and activities should be made public.Following the work of the Church and Pike Committees, Congress moved to revamp oversight of intelligence agencies. The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI) was established in 1976, the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence (HPSCI) in 1977. Each of these committees was granted oversight of the CIA as well as other intelligence agencies and charged to prevent the types of abuses that the Church and Pike Committees had criticized. In conjunction with their oversight duties, HPSCI and SSCI were responsible for authorizing funds for intelligence activities undertaken by the CIA and other agencies throughout the government. There is, however, a crucial difference between the charters of the two committees. Although HPSCI has oversight of NIP and shares (with the Armed Services Committee) oversight of the MIP, the SSCI has oversight only over the NIP.
In the Senate, oversight of the MIP is conducted by the Armed Services Committee (with informal consultation with the intelligence committee). Both SSCI and the Senate Armed Services Committee are represented in conferences on intelligence authorization bills; the final bill, as reported by the conference committee, authorizes both intelligence activities and intelligence-related activities.The two intelligence committees are not the sole organs of congressional oversight. The armed services committees often issue sequential reports on intelligence authorization bills. Annual defense authorization acts include the large national intelligence agencies in DOD as well as the intelligence efforts of the four services. Intelligence activities of agencies outside of CIA and DOD are authorized in other legislation although some departments have standing authorizations rather than annual authorization acts.As is the case with other congressional committees, intelligence oversight has entailed reviewing annual budget proposals for the Intelligence Community submitted by the administration, conducting hearings, preparing an annual authorization bill, and managing it for the respective chamber. The two committees publish reports to accompany the annual intelligence authorization bills, with dollar amounts for various intelligence agencies and activities included in classified annexes. The classified annexes are available to all Members, but only within Intelligence Committee offices and sanctions exist for any unauthorized release of classified data.The intelligence committees, however, do not have exclusive jurisdiction over expenditures for intelligence programs. National defense authorization acts also contain authorizing legislation for intelligence activities funded within their purview. There are various parts of defense authorization bills that are classified; some cover what are known as special access or "black" programs. These include not only some intelligence programs but also procurement of new weapons systems such as stealth aircraft. Members can obtain information about classified parts of defense authorization bills from the Armed Services Committees.Other authorization bills cover some intelligence activities providing a form of shared oversight. Budgets for INR, DEA and the FBI are funded through the appropriation bills that cover the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State and similar procedures are used for Treasury and Energy Department intelligence entities in the Treasury, Postal Service, and General Government and Energy and Water Development appropriations bills.
All of these combined, however, represent a small percentage of total intelligence spending–for instance, the FY2007 budget request for INR totaled only $51 million and other agencies are considerably smaller.There has been some controversy regarding the nature of authorizing legislation required. Section 504(a) of the National Security Act provides that appropriated funds may be obligated or expended for an intelligence or intelligence-related activity only if ... those funds were specifically authorized by the Congress for use for such activities... ." The nature of specific authorization had not, however, been defined. On November 30, 1990, President George H.W. Bush refused to sign ("pocket vetoed") the FY1991 Intelligence Authorization bill when it was presented to him (after the 101 st Congress had adjourned) and for over eight months intelligence activities were continued without an intelligence authorization act. Although some believed that authorizations contained within the National Defense Authorization Act for FY1991 ( P.L. 101-510 ) were sufficiently specific to meet the requirements of the statute, the House Intelligence Committee subsequently stated that, "It is the view of the congressional intelligence committees that only an intelligence authorization bill provides the degree of specificity necessary to comply with the meaning and intent of Section 504(a)." In 1993, language was included in the House report accompanying the FY1994 Defense Authorization Act that the Armed Services Committee "does not intend that the inclusion of ... authorization [of NFIP programs] be considered a specific authorization, as required by section [504] of the National Security Act of 1947... ." (This statement indicated that, whereas NFIP programs were not specifically authorized in defense authorization bills, TIARA programs were.) In addition, section 309 of the FY1994 Intelligence Authorization Act for FY1994 ( P.L. 103-178 ) amended the National Security Act of 1947 to make it explicit in law that the general authorization included in the 1947 legislation does not satisfy the requirement for specific authorization of intelligence and intelligence-related activities.In some years when appropriations have been passed prior to final action on authorization bills, the appropriations acts have included a provision similar to section 8092 of the FY2006 Defense Appropriations Act ( P.L.
109-148 ):Funds appropriated by this Act, or made available by the transfer of funds in this Act, for intelligence activities are deemed to be specifically authorized by the Congress for purposes of section 504 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 414) during fiscal year 2006 until the enactment of the Intelligence Authorization Act for fiscal year 2006.No FY2006 intelligence authorization bill was passed and, as a result, this brief clause in the appropriations bill served as the requisite authorization during FY2006. The FY2007 defense appropriations bill was passed prior to floor consideration of a FY2007 intelligence authorization bill and a similar clause was included in the defense appropriations bill ( P.L. 109-289 , section 8083). (No intelligence authorization legislation was passed in the 109 th Congress, but an intelligence authorization bill for FY2007 ( S. 372 ) was reported in the Senate in January 2007.) Although these provisions meet the statutory requirement for a "specific authorization," significantly less congressional guidance is provided for intelligence programs.As is the case with all government activities, the appropriations committees have a central role in intelligence programs. Even during the Cold War period when congressional oversight of intelligence activities received little public attention, annual appropriations were required and extensive hearing were held. In recent years, appropriations committees have had an increasingly significant influence on the conduct of intelligence activities. In 1998 a supplemental appropriation act ( P.L. 105-277 ) added substantial funds for intelligence efforts not included in the annual authorization bill, and in the post-9/11 period the practice of relying on supplemental appropriations for funding the regular operations of intelligence agencies has limited the extent of congressional guidance in regard to the intelligence budget.The reliance on supplemental appropriations has been widely criticized; the House Intelligence Committee in 2003 noted that while supplemental appropriations had reflected crisis in the aftermath of terrorist attacks, "The repeated reliance on supplemental appropriations has an erosive negative effect on planning, and impedes long-term, strategic planning.
The Committee hopes that the IC has finally reached a plateau of resources and capabilities on which long-term strategic planning can now begin."In addition to use of supplemental appropriations to fund intelligence activities, as noted above the required "specific authorization" of intelligence programs required by the section 504 of the National Security Act has in FY2006 been supplied by one paragraph (section 8092) of the FY2006 defense appropriations act ( P.L. 109-148 ). The reliance on appropriations measures to authorize intelligence programs may change the contours of intelligence oversight in Congress by emphasizing the role of the two appropriations committees.The defense subcommittees of the two appropriations committees review intelligence budget requests and approve funding levels for intelligence agencies that are part of DOD or whose budgets are contained (but not publicly identified) in defense appropriations acts, that is, CIA as well as NSA, DIA, the NRO, and NGA. There is a difference between appropriations for the CIA and the ODNI which, although included in defense appropriations acts, are transferred by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directly to the DNI and the CIA Director without the involvement of DOD. The Secretary of Defense is, however, heavily involved in the budgets and activities of intelligence agencies in DOD. The CIA and the defense agencies account for the vast bulk of all intelligence spending. Much smaller amounts are funded in appropriations measures for other departments that contain elements of the Intelligence Community.The role of the appropriations committees can be significant. For instance, in 1992, the Defense Appropriation Act for FY1993 ( P.L. 102-396 ) reportedly reduced intelligence spending to a level significantly lower than authorized by the Intelligence Authorization Act ( P.L. 102-496 ). In 1990-1991, the Senate Appropriations Committee and the SSCI worked closely together to sponsor a facilities consolidation plan for some CIA activities without the active involvement of the HPSCI. Substantial changes have been made to intelligence programs by appropriations measures and in FY2006 no intelligence authorization act exists and thus agencies rely solely on appropriations legislation.Since the creation of the modern Intelligence Community in the aftermath of World War II, intelligence budgets have not been made public.
At the conclusion of hostilities in August 1945, intelligence activities were transferred from the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) to the Army, Navy, and State Departments, which assumed responsibility for their funding. Meeting the expenses of the CIG, created in 1946, required the establishment of a "working fund," as noted above, which received allocations from the three departments. This pattern was continued when the CIA was established the following year (although there may have been relatively few, if any, transfers from the State Department). The transfer of appropriated funds was done secretly, reportedly at the insistence of Members of Congress.There are several parts of the intelligence budget that are made public. The costs of the Intelligence Community Management Account (CMA) are specified in annual intelligence authorization acts as are the costs of the CIA Retirement and Disability System (CIARDS). The CMA includes staff support to the DNI role and the CIARDS covers retirement costs of CIA personnel not eligible for participation in the government-wide retirement system. For FY2005, $310.4 million was authorized for 310 full-time CMA personnel and $239.4 million was authorized for CIARDS. In addition, the budget for the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research is made public and some, but not all, tactical intelligence programs are identified in unclassified DOD budget submissions. Careful scrutiny of officially-published data on intelligence expenditures would not, however, provide a valid sense of the size and content of the intelligence budget.The Church and Pike committees both called for public disclosure of the total amounts of each annual intelligence budget. The then DCI, George H.W. Bush, and President Ford both appealed to the Senate not to proceed with disclosure and the question was referred to the newly created SSCI. After conducting hearings, SSCI recommended (by a one vote margin) in May 1977 ( S.Res. 207 , 95 th Congress) that aggregate amounts appropriated for national foreign intelligence activities for FY1978 be disclosed. The full Senate did not, however, act on this recommendation.HPSCI, established by House Rule XLVIII after the termination of the Pike Committee, made an extensive study of the disclosure question.
After conducting hearings in 1978 (and despite the willingness of then DCI Stansfield Turner to accept disclosure of "a single inclusive budget figure") the House Committee concluded unanimously that it could find "no persuasive reason why disclosure of any or all amounts of the funds authorized for the intelligence and intelligence-related activities of the government would be in the public interest." With the failure of either chamber to take action, the disclosure question receded into the background as efforts (ultimately unsuccessful) were underway during the Carter Administration to draft a legislative charter for the entire Intelligence Community. The Reagan Administration showed markedly less interest in such questions as it launched a major expansion of intelligence activities. The issue would return during the Clinton Administration after the end of the Cold War and again in the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission as noted below.It should be understood that with the establishment of the two intelligence committees in the 1970s, Members have been able to review budget figures contained in the classified annexes accompanying reports intelligence authorization bills, although rules of both chambers prevent the divulging of classified information.Since the 1970s, arguments for and against the public disclosure of intelligence spending levels have turned on essentially the same issues, viz. the constitutional issue regarding the requirement for full reports of government expenditures (discussed below) and the broader question of the value of open political discourse, the dangers of revealing useful information to actual or potential enemies, and the difficulty of providing and debating aggregate numbers without being drawn into providing details.Advocates of disclosure argue that greater public discussion of intelligence spending made possible by the disclosure of spending levels would ultimately lead to a stronger intelligence effort. They maintain that no organization, even one with superior management and personnel, is immune to waste and inefficiency and that wider appreciation of the costs and benefits of intelligence could contribute in the long run toward improvements in the organization and functioning of intelligence. Senator William Proxmire put the case as follows:... people not only have a right to know, but you are going to have a much more efficient government when they do know.
We only make improvements when we get criticized, and you can only criticize when you know what you are talking about, when you have some information.If you know that there is a certain amount being spent on intelligence, then you are in a much stronger position to criticize what you are getting for that expenditure.Also, in terms of efficiency, publication of an aggregate figure for intelligence spending would result in a cleaner, more accurate defense budget. As presently handled, the defense budget includes significant unspecified national intelligence expenditures (e.g., the greater part of the CIA budget) that in many cases are not actually part of defense spending per se . Such expenditures make the defense budget and various components of it seem larger than is the case. Identification of those intelligence expenditures that are extraneous to defense could give the public a more accurate perception of defense costs.Those holding this position argue, in addition, that publication of limited intelligence spending totals would provide no useful information to a present or future adversary. Even during the height of the Cold War, Soviet authorities, they maintain, undoubtedly had a reasonably accurate knowledge of the extent of the U.S. intelligence budget and, in any event, were more concerned with the nature of our activities rather than the size of expenditures. Noting the demise of the Soviet Union, Representative Dan Glickman, then the Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, stated in 1994 that "Unless a justification on national security grounds exists, keeping the budget totals secret serves only one purpose, and that is to prevent the American taxpayer from knowing how much money is spent on intelligence."Opposition to public release has been based on the conviction that intelligence by its very nature stands apart from other activities of the government and the publication of general budgetary information, potentially exploitable by an adversary attempting to discern U.S. intelligence capabilities and operations, could compromise the nation's intelligence capabilities. This concept perceives intelligence to be an exceptional activity that cannot be handled according to normal procedures of an open society. This is particularly true of those operations that involve the collection of intelligence information.
Sophisticated reconnaissance devices, electronic technology, and human resources operating at significant risk are particularly vulnerable to human error or hostile penetration; consequently, they require extraordinary protective measures. In 1983, HPSCI described the unique vulnerabilities of intelligence systems as follows:Intelligence activities and capabilities are inherently fragile. Unlike weapons systems, which can be countered only by the development of even more sophisticated systems developed over a long period, intelligence systems are subject to immediate compromise. Often they can be countered or frustrated rapidly simply on the basis of knowledge of their existence. Thus budget disclosure might well mean more to this country's adversaries than to any of its citizens. Further, this information could then be used to frustrate United States intelligence missions.At the end of the Cold War along with the downsizing of the defense budget it was argued that intelligence spending should be significantly reduced. Some advocates of reduction anticipated that publication of spending totals would lead to a perception by the public that such levels of intelligence spending were unjustified and could be lowered. This potential for public opposition to existing levels of spending was also recognized by many who defended intelligence spending levels and probably reinforced their opposition to making the budget public.Although such perspectives may have been widely shared in the early 1990s, later in the decade the emergence of international terrorism and other transnational threats lead to concerns that intelligence spending should not be further reduced. The 9/11 attacks altered the climate regarding intelligence spending; even though there was widespread criticism of the performance of intelligence agencies, there was a pervasive determination to spend whatever was necessary on intelligence as part of the global war on terrorism. In recent years the argument for making intelligence spending levels public has not in general been a proxy argument for reducing intelligence spending inasmuch as few would argue that less intelligence is needed given the realistic potential for more Al Qaeda attacks.Other opponents of disclosure have argued that making public a few numbers indicating total spending levels (whether budget requests, authorizations, or appropriations) will be meaningless to the public debate.
Explanations will be immediately required to show that these figures are divided among several functions, threats, and agencies, cover national and tactical programs, may or may not include administrative and logistical support, etc. Pressures will in a politically adversarial context mount to publish these sub-totals as well as an aggregated figure. It is further argued that these explanations would likely result in a degree of transparency for U.S. intelligence activities that would allow adversaries to take effective countermeasures.There is also a contrary argument that intelligence spending, even within the NIP, is in large measure related to defense programs and could be usefully expressed as a percentage of overall defense spending. Admiral Bobby Ray Inman, who served as Deputy Director of Central Intelligence in the early Reagan Administration, testified in 1991 that, "I am certainly prepared to make unclassified the total amount, and defend to the public why 10% of our total defense efforts spent for both national and tactical intelligence is not a bad goal at all. Just as I don't think that 11 or 12% of the budget for research and development is a bad goal at all for the country."Some opponents of greater disclosure point out that large fluctuations in intelligence spending might also reveal major new programs under development (the example of the U-2s and satellites is sometimes mentioned). Premature exposure of such new capabilities could severely limit their ability to acquire valuable information before adversaries become aware of U.S. capabilities. On the other hand, according to a 1991 Senate report, DCI Stansfield Turner "testified in 1977 that there had been no 'conspicuous bumps' in the intelligence budget for the preceding decade. The [Senate] Select Committee's experience is similarly that no secrets would have been lost by publishing the annual aggregate budget total since then." Unconvinced defense analysts insist that revealing the fact of significant changes in U.S. intelligence budgets from year to year will alert unfriendly governments or groups to new efforts against them (or to a slackened effort by the U.S.
that can be exploited).Public discussion of the question of making intelligence budgets public has usually turned on the question of the constitutionality or the propriety of keeping intelligence spending figures classified. Beyond these issues, however, lies the less-discussed issue of the nature of intelligence and intelligence-related spending. The existence of the NIP and the MIP has been publicly acknowledged in many Executive and Legislative Branch publications. However, the respective roles of the separate programs are not well known outside of a relatively narrow circle of intelligence specialists. The role of tactical programs in particular is rarely considered in the context of discussions of making intelligence spending levels public. Observers express concern that characterizing some projects related to information support for targeting as a tactical intelligence program could be characterized in some cases as arbitrary inasmuch as similar projects may be included in other parts of the Defense budget. Reportedly, inclusion of some projects in the MIP program is not consistent from year to year and thus could lead to confusion in tracking intelligence spending.Some consideration has been given to making public only the budget for the NIP which contains funding for the CIA, the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (formerly the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA)), and the National Security Agency (NSA).When making total NIP spending public, some observers would consolidate responsibility for authorizing NIP in the two intelligence committees, leaving the armed services to deal with the MIP. It is likely that jurisdiction of the Armed Services committees will continue inasmuch as the NIP includes the budgets of major defense agencies that report to the Secretary of Defense and to which are assigned many thousands of military personnel. Some argue that the close ties between the NRO, NGA, and NSA and other Defense agencies also require that their budgets be prepared in the same Department.In 2002 the position of Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence (USD(I)) was established by section 901 of the FY2003 National Defense Authorization Act ( P.L. 107-314 ).
The incumbent of this position, currently Stephen Cambone, is charged with overseeing the budgets of DOD's intelligence agencies, including the portions that fall within the NIP and those are contained in the MIP. The USD(I) is the key point of contact between DOD and the Office of the DNI and the two offices collaborate in the preparation of annual budget submissions to Congress along with those of other intelligence agencies.An issue that arises in considering whether or not to disclose an aggregate intelligence budget figure is whether the Statement and Account Clause of the United States Constitution requires such disclosure. The pertinent constitutional language is contained in Article I, Section 9, Clause 7, which states:No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law; and a regular Statement and Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of all public Money shall be published from time to time. [Emphasis added.]A brief examination of the history of this language and of the scant case law interpreting the Statement and Account Clause may be of assistance in placing the disclosure issue in context.During the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia, the first language on the subject of statements and accounts was offered on September 14, 1787, by George Mason. The debate on the matter, as reflected in Madison's "Notes of Debates," was as follows:Col. Mason moved a clause requiring "that an Account of the public expenditures should be annually published" Mr. Gerry 2ded. the motionMr Govr. Morris urged that this wd. be impossible in many cases.Mr. King remarked, that the term expenditures went to every minute shilling. This would be impracticable. Congs. might indeed make a monthly publication, but it would be in such general Statements as would afford no satisfactory information.Mr. Madison proposed to strike out "annually" from the motion & insert "from time to time" which would enjoin the duty of frequent publications and leave enough to the discretion of the Legislature. Require too much and the difficulty will be get a habit of doing nothing. The articles of Confederation require half-yearly publications on this subject—A punctual compliance being often impossible, the practice has ceased altogether—Mr Wilson 2ded.
& supported the motion—Many operations of finance cannot be properly published at certain times.Mr, Pinckney was in favor of the motion.Mr. Fitzimmons—It is absolutely impossible to publish expenditures in the full extent of the term.Mr. Sherman thought "from time to time" the best rule to be given."Annual" was struck out—& those words—inserted nem: con:The motion of Col. Mason so amended was then agreed to nem: con: and added after—"appropriations by law as follows—"And a regular statement and account of the receipts & expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time."During the Virginia ratifying convention, the Statement and Account Clause occasioned comment on at least two occasions. On June 12, 1788, James Madison observed:The congressional proceedings are to be occasionally published, including all receipts and expenditures of public money, of which no part can be used, but in consequence of appropriations made by law. This is a security which we do not enjoy under the existing system. That part which authorizes the government to withhold from the public knowledge what in their judgment may require secrecy, is imitated from the confederation—that very system which the gentleman advocates.On the 17 th of June, 1788, George Mason raised a question as to the "from time to time" language, and the following debate ensued:Mr. GEORGE MASON apprehended the loose expression of "publication from time to time" was applicable to any time. It was equally applicable to monthly and septennial periods. It might be extended ever so much. The reason urged in favor of this ambiguous expression was, that there might be some matters which require secrecy. In matters relative to military operations and foreign negotiations, secrecy was necessary sometimes; but he did not conceive that the receipts and expenditures of the public money ought ever to be concealed. The people, he affirmed, had a right to know the expenditures of their money; but that this expression was so loose, it might be concealed forever from them, and might afford opportunities of misapplying the public money, and sheltering those who did it. He concluded it to be as exceptionable as any clause, in so few words, could be.Mr.
LEE (of Westmoreland) thought such trivial argument as that just used by the honorable gentleman would have no weight with the committee. He conceived the expression to be sufficiently explicit and satisfactory. It must be supposed to mean, in the common acceptation of language, short, convenient periods. It was as well as if it had said one year, or a shorter term. Those who would neglect this provision would disobey the most pointed directions. As the Assembly was to meet next week, he hoped gentlemen would confine themselves to the investigation of the principal parts of the Constitution.Mr. MASON begged to be permitted to use that mode of arguing to which he had been accustomed. However desirous he was of pleasing that worthy gentleman, his duty would not give way to that pleasure.Mr. GEORGE NICHOLAS said it was a better direction and security than was in the state government. No appropriation shall be made of the public money but by law. There could not be any misapplication of it. Therefore, he thought, instead of censure it merited applause; being a cautious provision, which few constitutions, or none, had ever adopted.Mr. CORBIN concurred in the sentiments of Mr. Nicholas on this subject.Mr. MADISON thought it much better than if it had mentioned any specified period; because, if the accounts of the public receipts and expenditures were to be published at short, stated periods, they would not be so full and connected as would be necessary for a thorough comprehension of them, and detection of any errors. But by giving them an opportunity of publishing them from time to time, as might be found easy and convenient, they would be more full and satisfactory to the public, and would be sufficiently frequent. He thought, after all, that this provision went farther than the constitution of any state in the Union, or perhaps in the world.Mr. MASON replied, that, in the Confederation, the public proceedings were to be published monthly, which was infinitely better than depending on men's virtue to publish them or not, as they might please.
If there was no such provision in the Constitution of Virginia, gentlemen ought to consider the difference between such a full representation, dispersed and mingled with every part of the community, as the state representation was, and such an inadequate representation as this was. One might be safely trusted, but not the other.Mr. MADISON replied, that the inconveniences which had been experienced from the Confederation, in that respect, had their weight in him in recommending this in preference to it; for that it was impossible, in such short intervals, to adjust the public accounts in any satisfactory manner.Mr. HENRY. Mr Chairman, we have now come to the 9 th section, and I consider myself at liberty to take a short view of the whole. I wish to do it very briefly. Give me leave to remark that there is a bill of rights in that government.There are express restrictions, which re in the shape of a bill of rights; but they bear the name of the 9 th section. The design of the negative expressions in this section is to prescribe limits beyond which the powers of Congress shall not go. These are the sole bounds intended by the American government. Whereabouts do we stand with respect to a bill of rights? Examine it, and compare it to the idea manifested by the Virginian bill of rights, or that of the other states. The restraints in this congressional bill of rights are so feeble and few, that it would have been infinitely better to have said nothing about it. The fair implication is, that they can do every thing they are not forbidden to do. What will be the result if Congress, in the course of their legislation, should do a thing not restrained by this 9 th section? It will fall as an incidental power to Congress, not being prohibited expressly in the Constitution....If the government of Virginia passes a law in contradiction to our bill of rights, it is nugatory.
By that paper the national wealth is to be disposed of under the veil of secrecy; for the publication from time to time will amount to nothing, and they may conceal what they may think requires secrecy. How different it is in your own government! Have not the people seen the journals of our legislature every day during every session? Is not the lobby full of people every day? Yet gentlemen say that the publication from time to time is a security unknown in our state government! Such a regulation would be nugatory and vain, or at least needless, as the people see the journals of our legislature, and hear their debates, every day. If this be not more secure than what is in that paper, I will give up that I have totally misconceived the principles of the government. You are told that your rights are secured in this new government. They are guarded in no other part but this 9 th section. The few restrictions in that section are your only safeguards. They may control your actions, and your very words, without being repugnant to that paper.The existence of your dearest privileges will depend upon the consent of Congress, for they are not within the restrictions of the 9 th section.... Some attention to this clause was also given in the New York ratifying convention and in the Maryland House of Delegates. The pertinent portion of the New York debates took place on June 27, 1788. During those debates, Mr. Chancellor Livingston, in expounding upon concerns raised with regard to the power to tax, stated in pertinent part:... You will give up to your state legislatures every thing dear and valuable; but you will give no power to Congress, because it may be abused; you will give them no revenue, because the public treasures may be squandered. But do you not see here a capital check? Congress are to publish, from time to time, an account of their receipts and expenditures.
These may be compared together; and if the former, year after year, exceed the latter, the corruption will be detected, and the people may use the constitutional mode of redress....... I beg the committee to keep in mind, as an important idea, that the accounts of the general government are, "from time to time," to be submitted to the public inspection.Hon. Mr. SMITH remarked, that "from time to time' might mean from century to century, or any period of twenty or thirty years.The CHANCELLOR asked if the public were more anxious about any thing under heaven than the expenditure of money. Will not the representatives, said he, consider it essential to their popularity, to gratify their constituents with full and frequent statements of the public accounts? There can be no doubt of it.On November 29, 1787, the Delegates to the Constitutional Convention were called before the Maryland House of Delegates to explain the Principles, upon which the proposed Constitution was founded. James McHenry, in his explanation of Section 9, stated in part:... When the Public Money is lodged in its Treasury there can be no regulation more consistent with the Spirit of Economy and free Government that it shall only be drawn forth under appropriation by Law and this part of the proposed Constitution could meet with no opposition as the People who give their Money ought to know in what manner it is expended.Thus, the history of this provision sheds some light upon the range of views with regard to anticipated benefits and intended sweep of this language, but does not give great attention to the possibility of secret funding for intelligence activities. Rather, the debate focused principally upon the general need for such a provision, the timing of the statements and accounts, and the practical impact of such a requirement. Nevertheless, there were a few indications that some of the delegates considered the possibility of secrecy attached to some of those statements and accounts. For example, one might compare Mr. Wilson's observations during the Constitutional Convention with those of Mr. Mason at the Virginia ratifying convention. Mr.
Wilson noted that some financial operations could not be published at certain times. Mr. Mason recognized that at times necessity might dictate that some secrecy would attach to military operations or foreign negotiations, but rejected the notion that receipts and expenditures of public money should ever be concealed. The most explicit mention of receipts and expenditures shrouded in secrecy is contained in the remarks of Mr. McHenry. He regarded the clause's requirement of publication from time to time as so broad as to permit the Congress to dispose of the public wealth in secrecy or to conceal what they determine requires secrecy. The history of the clause leaves it uncertain whether or to what extent his views were shared by others.It appears clear that the concern over how public funds would be spent was the motivating force behind the inclusion of the Statement and Account Clause. The clause seems to impose an affirmative duty to disclose information with regard to public receipts and expenditures. These general outlines do not appear to provide unequivocal guidance as to the scope and frequency of these disclosures, however, and there are some indications that at least delay in releasing some information and possibly secrecy of some information was anticipated, whether with approbation or alarm, by some of those at the Constitutional Convention and the ratifying conventions.Further insight may be drawn from an examination of judicial interpretation of the clause in the intelligence budget context. Several cases appear to be of significance in this regard. In 1974, the United States Supreme Court decided United States v. Richardson , 418 U.S. 166 (1974). There a federal taxpayer challenged the constitutionality of provisions of the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 concerning public reporting of expenditures on the ground that they violated the Statement and Account Clause. The provisions at issue permitted the CIA to account for its expenditures solely on the certificate of the Director, 50 U.S.C. § 403j(b).Richardson had made several attempts to obtain detailed information regarding the CIA's expenditures from the Government Printing Office and the Fiscal Service of the Bureau of Accounts of the Treasury Department, but found the information he received unsatisfactory.
He questioned the constitutionality of the provision and requested that the Treasury Department seek an opinion from the Attorney General on this question. The Treasury Department declined to do so, and Richardson then filed suit. The district court dismissed for lack of standing and on the ground that the subject matter raised political questions not amenable to judicial determination. Richardson's request for a three-judge court to try the matter was also rejected by the District Court. The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, sitting en banc, reversed, and remanded for consideration by a three-judge court.The Supreme Court granted certiorari and reversed. The issue before the Court was whether the respondent had standing to sue. The Court found that he did not, without reaching the merits of the constitutional question. In so doing, the Court noted:It can be argued that if respondent is not permitted to litigate this issue, no one can do so. In a very real sense, the absence of any particular individual or class to litigate these claims gives support to the argument that the subject matter is committed to the surveillance of the Congress, and ultimately to the political process....In footnote 11, 418 U.S. at 178, the Court also observed:Although we need not reach or decide precisely what is meant by "a regular Statement and Account," it is clear that Congress has plenary power to exact any reporting and accounting it considers appropriate in the public interest. It is therefore open to serious question whether the Framers of the Constitution ever imagined that general directives to the Congress or the Executive would be subject to enforcement by an individual citizen. While the available evidence is neither qualitatively nor quantitatively conclusive, historical analysis of the genesis of cl. 7 suggests that it was intended to permit some degree of secrecy of governmental operations. The ultimate weapon of enforcement available to the Congress would, of course, be the "power of the purse." Independent of the statute here challenged by respondent, Congress could grant standing to taxpayers or citizens, or both, limited, of course, by the "cases" and "controversies" provision of Art.
III.Not controlling, but surely not unimportant, are nearly two centuries of acceptance of a reading of cl. 7 as vesting in Congress plenary power to spell out the details of precisely when and with what specificity Executive agencies must report the expenditure of appropriated funds and to exempt certain secret activities from comprehensive public reporting. See 2 M. Farrand, The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, pp. 618-619 (1911); 3 id. , at 326-327; 3 J. Elliot, Debates on the Federal Constitution 462 (1836); D. Miller, Secret Statutes of the United States 10 (1918).Several lower court decisions are also instructive here. In Harrington v. Bush , 553 F.2d 190 (D.C. Cir. 1977), a Member of Congress sought declaratory and injunctive relief to foreclose the CIA from using the funding and reporting provisions of the 1949 Central Intelligence Act in connection with allegedly illegal activities. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit dismissed the suit for lack of standing. Plaintiff did not challenge the constitutional sufficiency of the funding and reporting provisions. In outlining the statutory and constitutional framework to set the case in context, the court noted that the funding and reporting requirements of the CIA Act... represent an exception to the general method for appropriating and reporting the expenditure of federal funds. Article I, section 9, clause 7 of the U.S. Constitution ... is not self-defining and Congress has plenary power to give meaning to the provision. The Congressionally chosen method of implementing the requirements of Article I, section 9, clause 7 is to be found in various statutory provisions....With respect to the reporting of expenditures, the key statutory provision of general application is 31 U.S.C. § 1029 which imposes a duty on the Secretary of the Treasury to provide Congress on an annual basis with "... an accurate, combined statement of the receipts and expenditures ... of all public moneys...." Since Congressional power is plenary with respect to the definition of the appropriations process and reporting requirements, the legislature is free to establish exceptions to this general framework, as has been done with respect to the CIA....In Halperin v.
CIA , 629 F.2d 144 (D.C. Cir. 1980), a private citizen sought access to CIA documents regarding legal bills and fee arrangements of private attorneys retained by the Agency through the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552. The documents were held to be exempt from disclosure under FOIA, exception 3, which addressed documents specifically exempted by statute. Judge Gasch found both that the documents were exempted under the protection from unauthorized disclosure afforded intelligence sources and methods, 50 U.S.C. § 403(d)(3) (1976), and that the information sought was specifically exempted by Section 6 of the Central Intelligence Act, 50 U.S.C. § 403g (1976). The plaintiff argued that application of these statutes under the FOIA exemption was violative of the Statement and Account Clause. The appellate court, relying upon United States v. Richardson, supra , rejected his argument, holding that he lacked standing to challenge the constitutionality of secret appropriations and expenditures for the CIA. The court found that the nature of the injury alleged by the plaintiff under FOIA was undifferentiated and common to all members of the Public and therefore, like the taxpayer in Richardson , the plaintiff had not shown the "`particular concrete injury' required for standing."In determining the constitutionality and justiciability of statutory secrecy for CIA expenditures, the Halperin court reviewed the history of the Statement and Account Clause. As to the debates in the Virginia ratifying convention in June of 1788, the court opined:Mason's statement clarifies several points concerning the Framers' intent. First it appears that Madison's comment on governmental discretion to maintain the secrecy of some expenditures, far from being an isolated statement, was representative of his fellow proponents of the "from time to time" provision. Second, as to what items might legitimately require secrecy, the debates contain prominent mention of military operations and foreign negotiations, both areas closely related to the matters over which the CIA today exercises responsibility. Finally, we learn that opponents of the "from time to time" provision, exemplified by Mason, favored secrecy only for the operations and negotiations themselves, not for receipts and expenditures of public money connected with them.
But the Statement and Account Clause, as adopted and ratified, incorporates the view not of Mason, but rather of his opponents, who desired discretionary secrecy for the expenditures as well as the related operations....The court regarded Patrick Henry's concern over the "time to time" language and the potential for expenditures being concealed by Congress as confirmation for the court's interpretation of the Madison-Mason debate. It observed further:Viewed as a whole, the debates in the Constitutional Convention and the Virginia ratifying convention convey a very strong impression that the Framers of the Statement and Account Clause intended it to allow discretion to Congress and the President to preserve secrecy for expenditures related to military operations and foreign negotiations. Opponents of the "from time to time" provision, it is clear, spoke of precisely this effect from its enactment. We have no record of any statements from supporters of the Statement and Account Clause indicating an intent to require disclosure of such expenditures.The Halperin court also found confirmation for its conclusion that the Statement and Account Clause did not require disclosure of the expenditures at issue from the historical evidence of government practices with regard to disclosure and secrecy before and after the advent of the Constitution. The Committee of Secret Correspondence of the Continental Congress was created on November 29, 1775, Congress resolving to provide for expenses incurred by the Committee in sending out its "agents". When the Committee received information from Arthur Lee, one of its agents, regarding French plans to send arms and ammunition to the Continental Army, it determined to maintain strict secrecy, even from Congress, because of the nature and importance of this information. The court notes that the Congress appears to have exerted greater direct control over the Committee after the Declaration of Independence.The camouflaging of the actual recipient and intended use of intelligence funds also appears to have had early usage under George Washington, commander-in-chief of the colonial armies, as reflected in a letter to him from Robert Morris, a member of the Committee of Secret Correspondence, from January 21, 1783.
The letter reflects both the provision of a cash account in anticipation of needs which might arise for contingencies and secret service. Drafts drawn from that account appear to have been drawn in favor of member's of Washington's family on account of secret services, seemingly a means of concealing the identity of the actual recipients.The court also noted a series of statutes creating contingent funds or secret service funds giving the President a means of providing secret funding for foreign intelligence activities. For example, in the Act of July 1, 1790, 1 Stat. 128 (10), the Congress created such a fund, appropriating such monies for "persons to serve the United States in foreign parts." In this act, the President was required to provide a regular statement and account of his expenditures from the fund, but permitted him to not disclose "such expenditures as he may think it advisable not to specify." By the Act of February 9, 1793, 1 Stat. 299, 300 (1793), Congress re-enacted the 1790 statute, but modified its language to allow the President to make secret expenditures without specification by making a certificate or by directing the Secretary of State to make a certificate for the amount. It might be noted that although the specific expenditures from these funds do not appear to have been expected to be disclosed, the statutes did include aggregate numbers for the appropriations for the funds created.In Aftergood v. Central Intelligence Agency , 355 F. Supp. 2d 557 (D.D.C. 2005), the plaintiff sought historical intelligence budget information for the years 1947 through 1970, as well as subsidiary agency budget totals, from the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) under FOIA. The CIA responded that the by asserting that the information sought was exempt from disclosure under exemption 3, 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(3), based upon 50 U.S.C. § 403-3(c)(7), which provided that the Director of Central Intelligence shall "protect intelligence sources and methods." Both parties filed for summary judgment. The court granted the CIA's motion and denied Mr. Aftergood's motion. The plaintiff argued, in part, that the Statement and Account Clause required publication of the information he requested.
Based upon the "unequivocal[]" holding of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit in Halperin , which, in turn, relied on Richardson , Judge Urbina rejected plaintiff Aftergood's contention and held that "a FOIA plaintiff does not have standing under the Statement and Account [C]lause to challenge the constitutionality of CIA budget secrecy."The Statement and Account Clause appears to impose an affirmative duty upon the Congress to periodically make a statement and account of its disposition of the public funds. The questions that arose during the debates upon this clause at the Constitutional Convention and the ratifying conventions went largely to the timing and scope rather than the fact of that obligation. The debates suggest that at least some of the delegates to the Constitutional Convention and the participants in the debates on ratification anticipated that some secrecy might be expected or needed in dealing with military and foreign affairs, and that the language of the clause might be broad enough to permit the Congress to determine what expenditures should be kept secret. Historically, both before and after the Constitution's advent, some provision in practice or statute appears to have been made to keep the substance of some intelligence information or activities closely-held, as well as the nature and recipients of funds for intelligence activities. The early statutes creating funds for contingent expenses or secret service do seem to include aggregate figures as to the money appropriated, but permit circumspection as to the documentation of expenses from the funds so created.The judicial interpretation of the statement and account clause appears to lay the power to define the sweep of the language in the hands of the Congress. The courts have been consistent in denying standing to those who have sought to challenge the constitutionality of the funding structure of the Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 under the Statement and Account Clause to try to access information not disclosed because of the strictures of the 1949 Act.
The Richardson Court and its progeny have indicated that the Congress possesses plenary authority to give substance to the language of the Clause and to require such reporting of expenditures as it deems in the public interest. The vehicle by which Congress gives substance to the Clause's obligations is by statutory mandate. The courts seem to suggest that secrecy as to some expenditures particularly in the area of foreign or military affairs appears to have been anticipated in the crafting of the clause and reflected in contemporaneous practice.Since the early years of the nation, Congress has from time to time, by statute, created funds for expenditures for foreign intelligence activities, and has permitted expenditures from those funds to be made by certificate. Many of the statutes do specify aggregate amounts to be appropriated for the contingent or secret funds in question, but do not require detailed reporting on the nature of the expenditures therefrom. The Central Intelligence Agency Act of 1949 permits transfer of funds for intelligence purposes from funds appropriated for other agencies, thereby facilitating concealment of the actual intelligence funding levels.It appears that there was some uncertainty among the Framers of the Constitution as to the scope of the obligation the clause imposed upon the Congress. From our review of the constitutional language, its history, and the sparse judicial interpretation of its import, it seems that the courts regard the Congress as having the power to define the meaning of the clause. The courts have not had occasion to address the issue on the merits, and, indeed, might refuse to do so on political question grounds if the issue were presented; however, the judicial interpretation of the Statement and Account Clause to date suggests that a court would be unlikely to find the disclosure of the aggregate intelligence budget constitutionally compelled.The end of the Cold War had a significant effect on intelligence budgets. Since the country does not face the relentless challenge of an enemy superpower with its own hostile intelligence services, significant reductions in intelligence spending were enacted and criticisms of the continued need for budgetary secrecy were raised anew.
Senator Robert Kerrey stated in November 1993: "Openness is the order of the day, and unless a threat as formidable and as lethal as the old Soviet Union comes along, our society and Government will steadily become more open. Our task is to make intelligence more useful to more Americans, not hoard it." Some also maintained that the alleged failures of intelligence agencies to appreciate the essential fragility of the Soviet system or to collect intelligence on the Iraqi nuclear capabilities, warrant a significant overhaul and downsizing of collection and analytical efforts.Reductions in defense spending across the board affected intelligence spending in two ways. First, it was assumed that a smaller military force structure reduced requirements for intelligence infrastructure; fewer forces would likely require fewer intelligence support personnel. This argument was countered by some who argued that leaner force structures actually required stronger intelligence support to ensure their most effective and efficient use. Secondly, as the bulk of intelligence funding continued to be "hidden" within the DOD budget, reductions in overall defense spending required either proportional reductions in intelligence programs or disproportionate reductions in non-intelligence programs to compensate for maintaining intelligence spending at existing levels. The latter alternative engendered strong resistance among defense planners already hard pressed to maintain other priority programs. In short, as defense spending contracted, it became more difficult to launch new intelligence efforts or even to maintain intelligence programs.This debate over future requirements for intelligence programs was related to (albeit not identical with) the continuing controversy over the desirability of public disclosure of intelligence spending levels. Some opposed to existing or higher levels of intelligence spending consider that public knowledge of the high costs of intelligence spending would lead to demands that they be drastically reduced. Efforts to reduce funding levels in intelligence authorization bills are complicated by the question of shared oversight.
In 1991, there was concern that reductions in FY1992 intelligence programs were reallocated to other defense programs rather than being used to reduce the deficit.With the end of the Cold War, the question of the desirability of making public the extent of the intelligence budget re-emerged in congressional debates and floor votes for the first time since 1975. In the consideration of the FY1992 intelligence authorization bill, the SSCI reported a bill ( S. 1539 ) that would have mandated disclosure of three different versions of the total intelligence and intelligence-related budget figure: the aggregate amount requested by the President; the aggregate amount authorized to be appropriated by the conference committee on the Intelligence Authorization Act; and the aggregate amount actually obligated by the executive branch. (The SSCI eschewed publication of the amount appropriated because it doubted "that such a figure could be tallied ... by the time a conference committee issued its report, due to the large number of line-items in which the intelligence appropriation is found.)" The Senate Armed Services Committee, which received the bill by sequential referral, noted that these requirements represent major departures from past practices of both Congress and the executive branch that have "profound implications for the conduct of United States intelligence activities and the formulation of intelligence policy which have not been considered in detail by all of the committees of jurisdiction." The Armed Services Committee proposed that the effective date of these provisions be postponed until FY1993 to allow for detailed consideration. The HPSCI version of the bill ( H.R. 2038 ) had no provision relating to public disclosure of the intelligence spending. The conference committee "while agreeing with the objective of the Senate provisions" chose to avoid mandating disclosure by law and stated its hope that the "[Intelligence] Committees, working with the President, will, in 1993, be able to make such information available to the American people, whose tax dollars fund these activities, in a manner that does not jeopardize U.S. national security interests." Section 701 of the final version of the legislation as enacted ( P.L.
102-183 ) stated:It is the sense of Congress that, beginning in 1993, and in each year thereafter, the aggregate amount requested and authorized for, and spent on, intelligence and intelligence-related activities should be disclosed to the public in an appropriate manner.Opposition by the George H.W. Bush Administration may have exerted an important influence on the dropping of mandatory disclosures. Bush, himself a former DCI who had argued against public disclosure in 1977, stated upon signing the final version, "Because secrecy is indispensable if intelligence activities are to succeed, the funding levels authorized by the Act are classified and should remain so." This was the Administration position, despite the statement by Robert Gates at his confirmation hearing for the DCI position in September 1991 that " ... from my personal perspective—and it's not ultimately my decision, I suppose, but the President's—I don't have any problem with releasing the top line number of the Intelligence Community budget. I think we have to think about some other areas as well. But, as I say, it's controversial."The following year, the two Intelligence Committees were focused on proposals to reorganize the Intelligence Community and held extensive hearings on the question. The Senate version of the FY1993 intelligence authorization bill ( S. 2991 ) included the same "sense of Congress" provision that had previously appeared in the FY1992 legislation. Although the House version ( H.R. 5095 ) again did not contain a similar provision, the conference committee included the Senate provision (as Section 303 in the final version) and there was no dissent among conferees who "reiterate[d] their hope that the intelligence committees, working with the President, will, in 1993, be able to make available to the American people, in a manner that does not jeopardize U.S. national security interests, the total amounts of funding for intelligence and intelligence-related activities." In the midst of the election campaign President Bush signed the legislation ( P.L. 102-496 ) on October 24, 1992, without comment.With the advent of the Clinton Administration in January 1993, some observers believed that the question would be revisited with a different conclusion.
Senator Howard Metzenbaum, a member of the SSCI, wrote to the President on February 24, 1993, urging the public disclosure of the intelligence budget. Woolsey, the newly appointed DCI, testified to HPSCI on March 9, 1993, of his concerns regarding making the intelligence budget public:There is no electronic or data fence around the United States or around American citizens. Disclosing that [intelligence spending levels] and the ensuing debate publicly means disclosing it to the people overseas who [ sic ] we target our intelligence assets on.My real sense of skepticism about this derives principally from the fact that coming forth with a single number communicates really nothing until one knows what goes into the number; and, therefore, proposals either to reduce or to increase that number would require a public debate. In such a debate, it is inconceivable to me that we wouldn't release information and details as the public and the Congress debated these issues in public and that would be damaging.Clinton himself responded to Metzenbaum on March 27 asking for the opportunity to "evaluate both the benefits and legitimate concerns which are associated such public disclosure." The House version of the FY1994 Intelligence Authorization bill ( H.R. 2330 ) contained no provision regarding public disclosure, but for the first time in three years the Senate version ( S. 1301 ) also lacked such a provision. According to Senator Arlen Specter, the provision was not included "on the expectation that there would be a stronger resolution compelling disclosure."On August 4, 1993, the House, considering H.R. 2330 under an open rule, debated an amendment offered by Representative Barney Frank mandating disclosure of "the aggregate amounts requested and authorized for, and spent on, intelligence and intelligence-related activities" beginning in 1995. The amendment failed on a vote of 169-264. Many of those who voted for the Frank amendment supported other amendments aimed at reducing the size of the intelligence budget and many observers hoped or feared, depending on their point of view, that making the budget public would lead to public demands for spending cuts.
This view was not, however, universal.In the Senate an amendment to the FY1994 Defense Appropriation bill ( H.R. 3116 ) was introduced on October 18, 1993, by Senator Daniel P. Moynihan to require "a separate, unclassified statement of the aggregate amount of budget outlays for the prior fiscal year for national and tactical intelligence activities. This figure shall include, without limitation, outlays for activities carried out under the Department of Defense budget to collect, analyze, produce, disseminate or support the collection of intelligence." Although Senator Moynihan, a critic of the Intelligence Community who had also introduced legislation ( S. 1682 ) to transfer the functions of the CIA to the State Department, withdrew the amendment shortly after introducing it, the proposal drew support from Senator Daniel Inouye, then the Chairman of the Appropriations Committee Subcommittee on Defense.Three weeks later, on November 10, 1993, the Senate debated an amendment to the FY1994 Intelligence Authorization bill offered by Senator Metzenbaum to include essentially the same "sense of Congress" language as included in the two previously enacted intelligence authorization bills. Although the provision had not been controversial in the Senate on the two earlier occasions, in 1993, the incoming Republican vice chairman of the SSCI, Senator John Warner, spoke out against the proposal. After lengthy debate, the Senate first voted not to table the Metzenbaum amendment by a vote of 49-51 and then voted 52-48 to incorporate it into the FY1994 Intelligence Authorization bill ( S. 1301 ). The amendment passed with the support of Senator DeConcini, the new SSCI chairman.The Committee of Conference on the two intelligence authorization bills subsequently met, but it did not include the provision regarding public disclosure of the intelligence budget in the final version. The conference report stated: "House conferees were of the view that, in light of the House vote [on the Frank amendment], they could not agree to the inclusion in the conference report of the Senate's 'sense of the Congress' provisions and therefore voted to insist on the House position." Thus, the FY1994 Intelligence Authorization Act ( P.L.
The Members stated that, "The level of intelligence spending (although not the details) must be open to the public." Further, "[t]he norms of our democratic system require that the public be informed."The President, replying in a December 27, 1993 letter to Representative Glickman, noted his opposition to the proposal in 1993 "because I believed that the cost of disclosure outweighed the benefits." He added, however, that he had asked Anthony Lake, the National Security Adviser, in concert with the DCI and others, to "look carefully at our position in light of your arguments and in consultation with Congress."By January 1994, both the executive and legislative branches were committed to review the advisability of making intelligence spending levels public. Congressional hearings were scheduled for 1994 and an NSC-level review was underway. At the HPSCI hearings conducted on February 22-23, 1994, DCI Woolsey repeated his opposition to budgetary disclosure. He emphasized the difficulty of conducting a debate on intelligence programs and priorities in public and his concern that it would be impossible to avoid moving from one aggregate number to disaggregated details that would educate "the rulers of North Korea, Iran, Iraq, Libya, terrorist groups, and others about our plans and programs."The 1994-1995 debate took place in the context of declining budgets and an intelligence community grappling with a world that, in the oft-quoted phrase used by DCI Woolsey in his confirmation hearings, has seen the slaying of the Soviet dragon, but still contained jungles "filled with a bewildering variety of poisonous snakes." Nevertheless, on July 19, 1994, the House voted (in the Committee of the Whole) 194-221-24 to reject an amendment to the intelligence authorization bill ( H.R. 4299 ) proposed by Representative Glickman, Chairman of the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, to amend the National Security Act of 1947 to require annual reports of amounts expended and amounts requested for intelligence and intelligence-related activities. The Senate version did not address the question of making intelligence spending levels public.A similar scenario unfolded in subsequent years. On September 13, 1995 the House voted (in the Committee of the Whole) 154-271-9 to reject an amendment to the intelligence authorization bill ( H.R.
1655 ) proposed by Representative Frank to disclose aggregate amounts requested and authorized for intelligence and intelligence-related activities. Again, the Senate bill had no provision relating to the question.The Senate did support disclosure in 1996, when it passed its version of the FY1997 intelligence authorization bill ( S. 1718 ) with a provision requiring the President to include with the annual budget submission the aggregate amount appropriated for the current year for intelligence and intelligence-related activities and the amount requested for the next year. On May 22, 1996, however, the House voted (in the Committee of the Whole) 176-248-9 to reject an amendment to the intelligence authorization bill ( H.R. 3259 ) proposed by Representative Conyers to require the President to submit a separate, unclassified statement of the appropriations and proposed appropriations for national and tactical intelligence activities. The subsequent Conference Committee acceded to the House and dropped the provision.On July 9, 1997 the House voted 192-237-5 (in the Committee of the Whole) to reject an amendment to the FY1998 Intelligence Authorization bill ( H.R. 1775 ) offered by Representatives Conyers that would require the President to submit a separate, unclassified statement of the appropriations and proposed appropriations for the current fiscal year, and the amount of appropriations requested for the fiscal year for which the budget is submitted for national and tactical intelligence activities. The Senate voted shortly thereafter, on June 19, 1997, 43-56-1, to reject an amendment to the FY1998 intelligence authorization bill ( S. 858 ) proposed by Senator Torricelli to require the President to submit annual aggregate figures on amounts requested and amounts appropriated for intelligence and intelligence-related activities.Despite these congressional votes interest in and pressure for public release of intelligence spending levels persisted. The Commission on the Roles and Capabilities of the U.S. Intelligence Community, known as the Aspin-Brown Commission, established pursuant to the FY1995 Intelligence Authorization Act ( P.L. 103-359 ), recommended in 1996:...
that at the beginning of each congressional budget cycle, the President or a designee disclose the total amount of money appropriated for intelligence activities for the current fiscal year (to include NFIP, JMIP, and TIARA) and the total amount being requested for the next fiscal year. Such disclosures could either be made as part of the President's annual budget submission or, separately, in unclassified letters to the congressional intelligence committees. No further disclosures should be authorized.Responding to the Commission's recommendations, on April 23, 1996 President Clinton authorized Congress to make public the total appropriation for intelligence at the time the appropriations conference report was approved. Such action was not, however, taken by the Legislative Branch.In October 1997, DCI Tenet announced that President Clinton had authorized him to release the aggregate amount appropriated for intelligence and intelligence-related activities for FY1997 ($26.6 billion). His press release indicated that the decision was based on two important points:First, disclosure of future aggregate figures will be considered only after determining whether such disclosures could cause harm to the national security by showing trends over time.Second, we will continue to protect from disclosure any and all subsidiary information concerning the intelligence budget: whether the information concerns particular intelligence agencies or particular intelligence programs. In other words, the Administration intends to draw a firm line at this top-line, aggregate figure. Beyond this figure, there will be no other disclosures of currently classified budget information because such disclosures could harm national security.The press release took note of the lawsuit filed earlier under the Freedom of Information Act and indicated that the President had preferred to take action concerning the declassification of the intelligence budget "in concert with the Congress," but "the present circumstances related to this lawsuit do not allow for joint action."The following March, Tenet announced that the aggregate amount appropriated for intelligence and intelligence-related activities for FY1998 was $26.7 billion. In the announcement Tenet stated that the determination that "this release will not harm national security or otherwise harm intelligence sources and methods."The release of the figure for FY1998 was, however, the final such release.
After litigants had sought to require the release of the amount requested for intelligence (in addition to the amount appropriated which had been made public), Tenet declined to make public the amount appropriated for FY1999. Some observers speculate Tenet may have been reluctant to address the substantial additional intelligence funds that were reportedly incorporated in the Supplemental Appropriation Act ( P.L. 105-277 ), enacted on October 21, 1998. In any event, no such releases have been made subsequently.The attacks of September 11, 2001, had a profound affect on intelligence issues. No longer was there a concern to reduce intelligence spending; the goal was to determine why there had been no tactical warning of the attacks that shattered thousands of American lives. A series of investigations was launched to fix the blame and to make recommendations for improved intelligence performance. There was a clear disposition in the Executive Branch and in Congress to increase intelligence spending significantly in support of the counterterrorism effort. Many of the recommendations for intelligence reorganization lie beyond the scope of this Report, but some addressed issues of intelligence acquisition and budgeting. Ultimately, a new position, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) was established. The DNI has been given statutory authorities for developing and determining the national intelligence budget and for ensuring the effective execution of the budget for intelligence and intelligence-related activities.In addition, the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, known as the 9/11 Commission, recommended that the "overall amounts of money being appropriated for national intelligence and to its component agencies should no longer be kept secret." This would be different from the Clinton Administration's practice in FY1997 and FY1998 when the total appropriated amount for all intelligence and intelligence-related activities was released.The Senate bill introduced in response to the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission ( S. 2845 ) provided that the NFIP would be renamed the National Intelligence Program (NIP) and that the President disclose for each fiscal year the aggregate amount of appropriations requested for the NIP. Furthermore, Congress would be required to make public the aggregate amounts authorized and appropriated for the NIP.
(The House bill dealing with intelligence reorganization ( H.R. 10 ) contained no similar provision.) An amendment to remove this provision in the Senate bill was tabled on October 4, 2004 by a vote of 55 to 37.Ultimately, the legislation that was enacted largely in response to the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission, the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004, P.L. 108-458 , did not include the Senate's provision to make intelligence spending figures public.The issue resurfaced in 2006 when the Senate Intelligence Committee reported its version of authorization legislation for FY2007, S. 3237 . Section 107 of the bill would require that the President disclose to the public the aggregate amount of appropriations requested annually for the NIP. The bill would further require that Congress make public the aggregate amount authorized and appropriated by Congress on an annual basis which would presumably include funds provided by supplemental appropriations bills. The bill further mandates a study by the DNI of the advisability of making such information public for each of the 16 elements of the Intelligence Community. No similar provision exists in the House version of FY2007 intelligence authorization legislation ( H.R. 5020 ). An identical provision was included in the FY2007 intelligence authorization bill ( S. 372 ) reported in the Senate in January 2007.In approaching the provision in S. 3237 , Congress will likely weigh a number of factors. Some Members believe that not only the spirit of constitutional provisions but also the interests of democracy have always required that intelligence budgets be identified. Even some of those who believed that Cold War conditions necessitated that intelligence budgets be kept secret now argue that conditions have changed and that current enemies would not be able to make use of information on overall levels of intelligence budgets. This view is opposed by others, especially in the House, who believe that the declassification of the intelligence budget could inevitably lead to the compromise of important information on sources and methods.There are, in addition, other factors that Members may wish to take into consideration.
First, making the NIP public might lead to the need for a separate intelligence appropriations bill. This, in turn, could prevent the possibility of easy trade-offs between intelligence and non-intelligence defense programs, arguably to the detriment of the intelligence effort. Second, is the fact that actions taken in regard to national intelligence efforts in supplemental appropriations bills would have to be reflected in accounts of intelligence spending arguably with more public justification than would be desirable in some circumstances.In addition, providing information on the NIP but not the MIP could give a false sense of the dimensions of the intelligence effort. Most observers argue that in operational terms, intelligence and intelligence-related activities are mutually supportive, even intertwined, and that considering them separately does not permit an understanding of intelligence capabilities. This could affect both those who want to reduce intelligence spending across the board as well as those who argue that intelligence spending has not kept up with the growth of the threats facing the country. If the intelligence-related activities were to be included, as was the case when FY1997 and 1998 budget levels were made public by DCI Tenet, there would have to be a recognition of the subtle and porous dividing lines between intelligence-related activities and other targeting and information-gathering and processing efforts. It would be possible to play "budget games" to demonstrate greater or lesser levels of commitment to intelligence by moving individual programs into or out of intelligence-related categories.After decades of debate, the issues surrounding the question of public disclosure of the intelligence budget have not changed. There is a question of the degree to which the Constitution requires such budgetary information to be made public. Another question centers on whether limited budgetary data can be made public without leading to detailed revelations of properly classified programs and whether information might be made available to adversaries who will use it against the U.S.Beyond these questions, there is an issue of how to frame an informed public debate on the extent of intelligence spending. How do you provide a sense of how the complex and disparate U.S.
The Davis-Bacon Act was adopted in early 1931. It was amended during the middle 1930s and, then, quietly became a part of federal contract practice. During the middle 1950s, however, it gained more visibility as the Davis-Bacon "prevailing wage principle" was added to various federal program statutes. For more than 4 decades now, and continuing into the 21 st century, Davis-Bacon has been almost constantly a focus of public policy concern: as legislation, through administrative rulemaking, and in litigation before the courts.As amended, the Davis-Bacon Act of 1931 requires, among other things, that construction contracts entered into by the federal government specify minimum wages to be paid to the various classes of laborers employed under those contracts. Minimum wages are defined as those determined by the Secretary of Labor (a) to be prevailing (b) in the locality of the project (c) for similar crafts and skills (d) on comparable construction work. The concept of wage was expanded in 1964 to include a fringe benefit component. The act has a coverage threshold of $2,000.In addition to direct federal construction contracts, the Davis-Bacon prevailing wage "principle" has been written into more than 50 federal program statutes. The act is supplemented by the 1934 Copeland "anti-kickback" Act (which requires weekly reporting of wages actually paid and an affirmation from employers that any deductions from wages due to employees have been proper) and by federal overtime pay and health and safety standards statutes. Further, some states have enacted "little Davis-Bacon" acts within their respective jurisdictions.The rhetoric, for and against the act, has changed little through the years. Does the act protect workers, help stabilize the construction industry, and serve the federal contracting community? Or, is it anti-competitive, preventing flexible workforce utilization? Has it been administered effectively and, if not, can it be administered in an equitable fashion? Is there sufficient objective information concerning the act to allow for fair assessment of the statute and its impact?This report examines policy issues the act has sparked through the years and which remain a part of the Davis-Bacon debate into the 21 st century.
These include such questions as: wage rate determination procedures, reporting requirements under the Copeland Act, an appropriate threshold for activation of the statute, interagency relationships with respect to Davis-Bacon enforcement and compliance activity, administrative or judicial appeals procedures, the use of "helpers" and other low-skilled workers on covered projects, and the right of a President to suspend the statute as well as the conditions under which such a suspension may occur. That the fundamental premise of the act remains in contention after 75 years may be, itself, part of the public policy debate.Historically, the act has enjoyed strong bipartisan support; but, at the same time, especially since the middle 1950s, it has provoked militant criticism. Federal agencies have disagreed, publicly, concerning the usefulness and administration of the act. It has been subjected to judicial review and interpretation, each new application becoming, in turn, a matter for further examination.Although the Department of Labor (DOL) has made certain changes in the act's administration, the statute itself has remained largely unchanged since 1935. Through the years, however, Congress has extended the act's provisions to cover an ever wider segment of federal and federally assisted construction; and, at least during the past several decades, such extensions of coverage have provided an opportunity for renewed debate concerning the act and its impact.Critics of the act argue, even were the statute justified in 1931, that it has now been rendered obsolete through market changes and enactment of other federal labor standards laws—notably, the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938. Further, they argue that the act is inflationary, adding to the cost of public construction and, thereby, potentially reducing the volume of construction and the number of federal construction jobs. Finally, they suggest that it is anti-competitive, discriminates against smaller firms, and is difficult to administer. Repeal or significant modification of the act, they note, would reduce the paperwork burden of doing business with the federal government and would allow contractors more flexibility in manpower utilization.The act's defenders hold that Davis-Bacon is as important now as it was in the 1930s.
It prevents, they assert, competition from "fly-by-night" firms that undercut local wages and working conditions and compete, unfairly, with local contractors for federal work. It helps stabilize the industry, an advantage, they suggest, to workers and to employers. In addition, Davis-Bacon may assure the consuming agency of better craftsmanship (if, when firms are required to pay not less than the locally prevailing wage, they tend to employ more highly skilled workers); and, supporters of the act add, it may reduce both the initial cost of federal construction through greater efficiency and decrease the need for repair and/or rehabilitation. At the same time, they point out, it deters contractors from fragmenting work and utilizing low-skill/low-wage "pick-up" crews and "helpers" and promotes skill transfer through formal apprenticeship programs.The Davis-Bacon literature is extensive and diverse. Generally, it falls into three categories: public materials (i.e., legislative hearings, agency reports and analyses), journalistic pieces, and academic studies. Of the latter, some are products that have been commissioned by interest groups (though they may be scholarly, nonetheless); others are putatively independent academic work. In some cases, there has been a merger of scholarship with journalism.Through the years since the prevailing wage legislation was first considered at the federal level, there have been numerous congressional hearings that have reviewed the statute. However, these seem, often, to have focused broadly upon policy concerns rather than upon specific economic impact and its assessment.As the Davis-Bacon debate has evolved, arguments have progressed through several levels of affirmation and rebuttal, most of which, pro and con, are subject to further oft-repeated counter arguments. At large, there appear to be significant gaps in our knowledge of the act, its administration and impact. Few studies of the statute, whether public or private, have escaped criticism on the grounds of flawed methodology or inadequate sample size.Prevailing wage protection, under public contracts, seems to have commenced at the state level and, later, to have been adopted by the federal government.Congressional interest in federal prevailing wage legislation predates both the "New Deal" and the economic collapse of 1929. Indeed, it emerged during a time of relative prosperity in the construction industry.
The building industry, observed William Tracy of the Building Trades Department, AFL, was "enjoying the greatest prosperity in its history—with wages and hours of labor and improved working conditions better than ever before." But, it appears also to have been a period of turbulence and intense competition within the contracting community.During hearings before the House Committee on Labor in February 1927, Representative Robert L. Bacon (R-N.Y.) echoed Tracy's views. In New York, he noted, "wages are fair and there has been no difficulty in the building trades between employee and employer ... for some time." Bacon wanted to keep it that way: in 1927, he introduced legislation to require that locally prevailing wage standards be met in federal construction work.Problems, however, had emerged with respect to construction of a federal hospital in Bacon's New York district. Local contractors, he explained, had submitted bids on the project that reflected local standards. But the contract was awarded to an Alabama firm. The latter, Bacon noted, "... brought some thousand non-union laborers from Alabama into Long Island, N.Y.; ... They were herded onto this job, they were housed in shacks, they were paid a very low wage and the work proceeded." In Bacon's view, the least government could do, when contracting, was "to comply with the local standards of wages and labor prevailing in the locality where the building construction is to take place." His measure did not seek to inflate wages artificially but, rather, to assure that government respected the existing local standard. The bill was not adopted.Similar legislation was introduced in 1928 and, this time, Bacon won strong support from the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL). In a note to Labor Secretary James J. Davis, Commissioner of Labor Statistics Ethelbert Stewart pointed out: "The essence of the thing as I see it is: Is the Government willing for the sake of the lowest bidder to break down all labor standards and have its work done by the cheapest labor that can be secured and shipped from State to State?" Steward expressed his full support for the Bacon bill, as did Davis.
Indeed, to this point, the hearings had brought forth a body of testimony generally supportive of the prevailing wage concept, if not always of the specific provisions of the several differing proposals. But, once again, the proposal died when Congress adjourned.Late in 1930, after nearly a decade as Secretary of Labor (through the Administrations of Warren Harding, Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover), Davis moved on to become a United States Senator. Among the first acts of the Pennsylvania Republican was introduction of prevailing wage legislation. Representative Bacon offered a companion bill.The language of the Davis-Bacon proposals had been worked out by a committee "representing all of the departments" of the Hoover Administration and "unanimously agreed on." William N. Doak, Davis's successor as Labor Secretary in the Hoover cabinet, testifying in support of the Davis-Bacon legislation, noted that current contracting practices were "not only disturbing to labor but disturbing to the business community as well." When the legislation was taken up in the Senate, Senator Robert LaFollette (Progressive Republican-Wisc.), chairman of the Committee on Manufactures, urged that the measure "be speedily enacted."The report, submitted for the Committee by Senator Davis, stated that the "measure does not require the Government to establish any new wage scales in any portion of the country." Instead, the report pointed out, "[i]t merely gives the Government the power to require its contractors to pay their employees the prevailing wage scales in the vicinity of the building projects. This is only fair and just," it noted, "to the employees, the contractors, and the Government alike." A similar report was filed by Representative Richard J. Welch (R-Calif.) for the House Committee on Labor.Neither report recorded dissent; but, when the measure was considered in the House, reservations were voiced. Representative Thomas L. Blanton (D-Texas), noted that the measure was "the most ridiculous proposition I have ever seen brought before a legislative body." Observing that the bill imposed a wage floor (that not less than the locally prevailing wage be paid), Blanton objected that workers and contractors ought to be free to bargain for as high or low a wage as they might choose.
"You are taking away from American citizens, contractors, and laborers alike the sacred, inherent right of contract—the right to make their own contracts for themselves," the Texan observed. "We are thus proposing by this pernicious bill to interfere with a sacred, inalienable right that has given initiative and independence to men for ages past."In addition, Representative Blanton placed in the Record a letter from Comptroller General J. R. McCarl who raised questions of a different sort. Since the specific determination of prevailing wage rates was to be made after bids had been submitted, McCarl argued that none of the parties to the agreement "could know at the time of contracting the prevailing rate of wages which the contractors must pay during the progress of the work." A. P. Greensfelder, President of the Associated General Contractors of America, seemed to concur in McCarl's judgment. He emphasized the uncertainty that would result, though agreeing, in principle, that contractors should pay not less than the locally prevailing wage rate.At the same time, Representative Anning Prall (D-N.Y.) suggested that the enforcement provisions of the legislation were insufficiently strong. But, he supported the bill and observed: "If we find unscrupulous contractors attempting to beat the law, we can quickly amend it by putting teeth in it."In the end, the act was adopted without a roll call and, on March 3, 1931, signed into law by President Hoover.Dissatisfaction with the act was soon rife, both with labor and contractors. The initial enactment had been a brief and relatively simple statement of policy. Armand Thieblot, who has written extensively about the act, suggests that it "lacked effective mechanisms for either policing or enforcing" its requirements, and that "no provisions were made for informing laborers of the protections afforded them" under the new statute. Trade unionists were concerned that the scope of the act might leave too many workers unprotected. The threshold had initially been set at $5,000, sparking labor's fear that contracts might be fragmented in order to escape the act's requirements—a matter of special concern for the painting and decorating crafts.
The AFL's Executive Council noted that the Davis-Bacon Act "will prove a great benefit so far as it goes ," adding that "[a]mendments to further benefit the building trades will be submitted at future sessions of Congress."Among industry objections, perhaps the most critical was the fact that wage rate determinations were made after bids were submitted. Thieblot, joining in the early reservations of Comptroller General McCarl, noted above, explains: "Postdetermination of wages meant that a contractor could be forced to pay wages which, upon determination by the secretary of labor, were higher than the rate on which his bid was based." In effect, contractors (and, perhaps, especially those from outside of the area of work) were bidding blindly: agreeing to pay whatever wage rate the Secretary might determine to be prevailing in the locality. And, in the beginning, it may not have been entirely clear what was meant by "prevailing" and certain other terms used in the act.Changes in the act were quickly proposed. In January 1932, the House Committee on Labor commenced oversight hearings. Almost immediately, however, President Hoover responded with an executive order tightening the act's administration.Behind-the-scenes negotiations concerning amendment of the act appear to have been intense. At first, organized labor seems to have urged Members of Congress to add a strengthened penalty structure to the statute. Oversight hearings commenced in the House early in January 1932. But, no sooner had they gotten underway than President Hoover issued Executive Order No. 5778, dated January 19, 1932, but made public two days later. Representative William Connery (D-Mass.), in an analysis not immediately challenged, recalled that "representatives of the building trades, after a conference with Secretary Doak, made a deal with the Secretary whereby, if the President ... would issue an executive order on the Davis-Bacon bill they would be against any further legislation on the matter by the Committee on Labor."President Hoover's Executive Order provided that all Davis-Bacon contracts contain the following stipulations:That wages be paid in full not less than once a week, "in lawful money of the United States ...
Representative Bacon noted that the Order "simply carries out in the Government contract form what Congress intended by the law." Secretary Doak observed that the act had "worked out much more satisfactorily than many of us believed possible when the legislation was enacted," predicting that the Order would "prove most helpful in further stabilizing the wage rates and conditions in the construction of Federal buildings," and adding that there was no "necessity of further legislation ... at the present time."Industry was less pleased, arguing that wage rates should be made known prior to the submission of bids. Legislation to achieve industry's objectives, introduced by Senator Jesse Metcalf (R-R.I.), provided for predetermination of wage rates, allowed for reopening of contracts which covered extended periods, established an "anti-kickback" provision, and set forth procedures for enforcement and the imposition of penalties for violators. Following hearings, the measure was adopted by the Senate with minimum discussion and on a voice vote.By the time the Metcalf bill was called up in the House (June 1932), opinion had been solidly formed. Labor opposed it; industry urged its passage. It was significantly modified on the floor, in part to make it more nearly acceptable to labor, but it remained controversial.During hearings and floor debates, issues were raised that would continue to be a focus of controversy through the next six decades. For example: What constitutes a prevailing wage ? How is a prevailing wage to be determined and when? Should there be regional variations in standards? Would wages, under Davis-Bacon, be comparable for private and public construction? What constitutes an appropriate locality for purposes of wage determinations? How should problems of abuse under the act (notably, kickbacks) be dealt with? Should the protections of the act extend to production of prefabricated materials to be used in construction? Was the act only of advantage to employed construction workers, a class that might not be in need of federal protection? Does the act restrict employment opportunities in construction? These questions were not to be resolved in the near term.As amended, the measure passed the House and, after conference, was approved by the Senate.
On June 13, 1934, President Roosevelt signed the measure.The Copeland "anti-kickback" Act, which supplements Davis-Bacon, orders a fine of not more that $5,000 or imprisonment of not more than five years, or both, for anyone who induces any person engaged in federal or federally financed construction "to give up any part of the compensation to which he is entitled under his contract of employment, by force, intimidation, threat of procuring dismissal from such employment, or by any other manner whatsoever." The act authorized the administering agencies to "make reasonable regulations" for its enforcement, but specifically required that "each contractor and subcontractor shall furnish weekly a sworn affidavit with respect to the wages paid each employee during the preceding week." (See discussion later in this report of proposals by the Reagan Administration to modify the reporting requirements of the Copeland Act.)During a general review of federal contracting policy, Senator David Walsh (D-Mass.) had conducted oversight of the Davis-Bacon Act. He found that the statute was "inadequate to cope with many of the practices to which contractors have resorted," a finding concurred in by the various departments involved with the Davis-Bacon Act.By the spring of 1935, Senator Walsh had ready significant amendments to the act. In addition to anti-kickback proposals which had been dealt with separately, Walsh now proposed the following. First. The dollar volume threshold for coverage under the act should be reduced from $5,000, as in the original law, to $2,000. Second. Coverage should be extended to all federal contract construction of whatever character to which the United States and the District of Columbia may be a party ("construction, alteration, and/or repair, including painting and decorating , of public buildings or public works"). (Emphasis added.) Third. There may be withheld from the contractor by the contracting agency funds sufficient to pay the appropriate wages to any workers underpaid by the contractor or by one of the subcontractors. Fourth. The Comptroller General would be directed to prepare a list of contractors who have "disregarded their obligations to employees and subcontractors." Listed violators would be barred from federal contracts for a period of three years. Fifth.
Laborers would be provided a "right of action and/or of intervention" in court against a contractor "and in such proceedings it shall be no defense that such laborers and mechanics accepted or agreed to accept less than the required rate of wages or voluntarily made refunds." Sixth. Davis-Bacon contracts were to state "the minimum wages to be paid various classes of laborers and mechanics." Thus, there would be a predetermination of the Davis-Bacon wage rate: i.e., prior to the submission of bids by a contractor.Although certain of the provisions might have seemed controversial, the Walsh amendments were agreed to in the Senate without discussion. In the House, they were reported favorably without change. The Committee on Labor noted that the bill "is merely a logical development of a policy consistently expressed by Congress for the past four years with respect to minimum wages on public construction." In the House, the bill was called up and, again, passed without discussion. A week later, the measure was signed by the President.For 2 decades after 1935, the Davis-Bacon Act seems to have become, quietly, a standard part of federal contract policy. The history of the act during this period, however, remains largely to be explored.Underlying the Davis-Bacon Act was the concept that the United States, as a consumer, has the right to require certain standards, by contract, when doing business. If a contractor chose to engage in federal construction work, then he had to abide by the stated specifications—including labor standards. In 1936, this principle was extended to the contract purchase of goods with enactment of the Walsh-Healey Public Contracts Act. (The principle was further extended, in 1965, with adoption of the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act, the final segment of federal contract labor standards law.)In 1938, Congress established a general minimum wage and overtime pay structure for the private sector with adoption of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). Enactment of this broad wage/hour legislation may have lessened interest in the Davis-Bacon and Walsh-Healey Acts.
Indeed, some, later, have suggested that the Davis-Bacon Act was no longer needed at all in view of the general labor standards protections guaranteed by the FLSA.In 1940, the protections of the Davis-Bacon Act were extended to the territories of Hawaii and Alaska. In 1941, its provisions were made to apply to construction contracts arranged on a cost-plus/negotiated basis.With the outbreak of World War II, federal contracting entered a new era. In the early 1940s, "government procurement agencies and the international unions" entered into a series of agreements that "provided for stabilization of wages and conditions at a time when we were at the critical tooling up stage of the war effort. The machinery established by those agreements," President Harry Truman later recalled, "... served us well during the war" and he pointed with pride to "[t]he splendid record of cooperation with the Davis-Bacon Division of the Department of Labor." But, by 1947, most war-time controls were gone.Throughout the evolution of the Davis-Bacon Act, there has been a lingering issue of where ultimate responsibility for its administration resided. Did authority rest with DOL, with the contracting agencies or, perhaps, with the General Accounting Office (GAO)? As part of a program of post-New Deal/post-World War II administrative reforms, President Truman sought to establish enhanced order, cooperation and efficiency.In 1947, Mr. Truman noted that administration of the Davis-Bacon and Copeland Acts had been divided between DOL and the contracting agencies. "As a result," he observed, "enforcement has been very uneven and workers have not had the protection to which they were entitled." Therefore, he developed Reorganization Plan No. 2, which consolidated certain labor standards activities under the Secretary of Labor. The Reorganization Plan authorized the Secretary of Labor "to coordinate the administration of the acts for the regulation of wages and hours on Federal public works by establishing such standards, regulations, and procedures" as will make enforcement more effective.Three years later (March 1950), President Truman issued Reorganization Plan No.
14 in which he took note of the confusion caused by interagency involvement in enforcement of the "several laws regulating wages and hours of workers employed on Federal contracts for public works or construction." He pointed specifically to the Davis-Bacon and Copeland Acts, together with certain federal overtime pay laws, and to the labor standards provisions that had been added to program statutes involving construction "financed in whole or in part by loans or grants from the Federal Government or by mortgages guaranteed by the Federal Government." Mr. Truman noted that "[t]he methods adopted by the various agencies for the enforcement of labor standards vary widely in character and effectiveness. As a result, uniformity of enforcement is lacking and the degree of protection afforded workers varies from agency to agency." To give order to this patchwork, the President authorized the Secretary of Labor "to coordinate the administration of legislation relating to wages and hours on Federally financed or assisted projects ." (Emphasis added.)In presenting the plan to the Congress, the President acknowledged: "Since the principle objective of the plan is more effective enforcement of labor standards, it is not probable that it will result in savings. But," he added, "it will provide more uniform and more adequate protection for workers through the expenditures made for the enforcement of the existing legislation."Coverage issues, however, raised during the Truman Era reorganization—on the one hand, direct construction by the federal government; and, on the other, construction financed through grants and loans—have continued to be a point of controversy into the 21 st century. Similarly, legislative proposals continue to explore the primacy of the Secretary of Labor with respect to the administration of the Davis-Bacon Act. These issues remain unresolved.Prevailing wage requirements (the Davis-Bacon principle ) had been added to a number of program statutes by the close of the Truman Era: moving from Davis-Bacon coverage for direct federal construction to projects financed entirely or in part with federal funds.
During the Eisenhower Administration, such extensions of prevailing wage coverage became more frequent.The Davis-Bacon debates of the middle 1950s reiterated many of the earlier arguments for and against the act, and added a few new concerns. But the debates appear to have resolved little.In a 1955 dissent from prevailing congressional policy, several Senators argued that adding a Davis-Bacon provision to program legislation would expand the federal bureaucracy, create paperwork and litigation, increase the control of the federal agencies, and pose definitional problems with respect to classification, locality and prevailing rates—all issues that would reemerge during the Reagan/Bush Era. Similarly, in 1958, Senator Strom Thurmond (then, D-S.C.) contended that DOL had failed to administer the act properly, suggested that Davis-Bacon wage standards were being imported from urban to rural areas (thus, raising rural wage rates), and decried the usurpation by Washington of the rights of the States. The South Carolinian raised arguments that, for the most part, would be the subject both of debate and litigation for many decades thereafter.Speaking from a somewhat different philosophical perspective, Senator Clifford Case (R-N.J.) stated that the Davis-Bacon Act protects "fairminded and responsible contractors against unfair competition from contractors who base their bids on wage levels lower than those actually prevailing in the area." But, he also toke note of the protections that the act affords workers. His views were concurred in by Senator Jacob Javits (R-N.Y.) who, seemingly harkening back to the concerns of the 1930s, warned that "we must guard against ... the breaking down of the wage pattern in a particular area."Whatever the diversity of opinion may have been during the 1950s with respect to the prevailing wage statute (and, however vigorous opposition to the act may have been), Congress continued to preserve the act and to extend Davis-Bacon coverage through the provisions in various federal program statutes.From a quick review of legislative activity during the Eisenhower Era, one might reach several tentative, preliminary, observations.First . Attaching Davis-Bacon provisions to program statutes seems to have been more controversial and to have sparked more heated debate than had passage of the Davis-Bacon Act, per se.Second .
As late as the mid-1950s, many Republicans in Congress continued to claim credit for the statute. For example, Representative Russell Mack (R-Wash.) affirmed:The two authors of the Davis-Bacon law were Senator Davis, a Republican of Pennsylvania, and Representative Bacon, a very conservative Republican Congressman from the State of New York. A Republican House and a Republican Senate passed the Davis-Bacon law and a Republican President, Herbert Hoover, signed it.So the Davis-Bacon provision we are talking about today is a 25-year-old Republican law.The claim of Representative Mack notwithstanding, Davis-Bacon was not regarded as a partisan enactment. The debate, both in committee and on the floor, involved Democrats and Republicans on each side of the issue.Third . At least some Members supported the act in terms of the benefits that it held for contractors. The act, recalled Representative Thor Tollefson (R-Wash.), "has been valuable as a remedial measure to protect contractors and craftsmen from unfair contract bids." He added that a Davis-Bacon provision was necessary to eliminate existing unfair bidding advantages of contractors who pay low wages in areas where union rates prevail." The Tacoma Republican affirmed that the Davis-Bacon Act had assured all contractors "[e]quality of bidding opportunity." It protects contractors "against unfair competition and restricts the area of competition to economy and efficiency."Fourth . The issue of the cost impact of Davis-Bacon sparked a divided opinion. In a 1956 report on highway legislation, five Members dissented voicing complaints about the act based upon economy.How about the increased cost of highways if the Davis-Bacon [provision] were added? It is variously estimated at $2 to $4 billion, which means less highway for the money expended. The unfortunate part is that the administrative and bureaucratic redtape, which Federal wage fixing entails, causes waste from which no one benefits and for which the taxpayer must bear the burden.No source was provided for the projected cost estimate. And, conversely, Representative Mack of Washington declared that the act simply "keep[s] wages ... at the prevailing rate." The act, he argued, "does not raise wages but it does prevent wage cutting and it is wage cutting and labor standard lowering that we wish to prevent." Mr.
Mack stated that the Washington State Highway Commission had endorsed the Davis-Bacon provision.Promptly, Gardner Withrow (R-Wisc.) declared his complete agreement with Mack that Davis-Bacon would not make the cost of highway construction "any greater than it is now." Representative Withrow affirmed that "the responsible road people in the State of Wisconsin declare that the cost under the Davis-Bacon Act as it is at the present time would not be any more than it is now. So," he concluded, "the argument that it would greatly increase the cost of building roads is entirely a ghost and a phantom and is not substantiated by the facts."Similarly, a division of opinion had developed in the Senate. The initial highway legislation (1955) had been silent on the matter of Davis-Bacon coverage. Organized labor, during hearings, had urged that prevailing wage coverage be specifically provided; and, when the legislation was reported, a Davis-Bacon provision had been added. Senators Edward Martin (R-Pa.), Prescott Bush (R-Conn.), and Norris Cotton (R-N.H.) dissented from the report of the Committee on Public Works, arguing that this extension of Davis-Bacon requirements would expand the Federal bureaucracy, create paperwork and litigation, increase the control of the federal agencies, and pose definitional problems with respect to classification, locality and prevailing rate. On the floor, debate was extensive; and, at the initiative of Senator Dennis Chavez (D-N.M.), the prevailing wage language was dropped. Subsequently restored by the House, the provision was retained in conference and became law (1956).Fifth . The Eisenhower Era may have been a transitional era where Davis-Bacon was concerned. Some Members seemed bewildered that the act should be controversial. Representative Katharine St. George (R-N.Y.), for example, queried "whether it is not a fact that the Davis-Bacon provision has been in the law for many years, and we have never heard any objecting to it until now." Similarly, Representative Frank Smith (D-Miss.) noted that "[a]ll of our committee ... has voted many times for bills which include Davis-Bacon...."Early in the 1960s, major federal construction programs commenced in defense and space and federal contract labor standards requirements took on a new importance.
There was also a perception, whether or not justified, that the federal construction program was beset with labor-management problems. Some argued that vital projects were being delayed by clashes between rival unions with jurisdictional disputes erupting into strikes or walkouts. And it was argued that such labor troubles were adding, unnecessarily, to the cost of public construction. There were allegations of disputes over turf, involving both workers and contracting or supply firms, which, in turn, affected the applicability of federal contract labor standards laws.Since the wage requirements under Davis-Bacon were generally higher than those under Walsh-Healey, an employer might have preferred to classify as much of the work as possible as "manufacturing" rather than as construction per se and, thereby, to reduce his labor costs. With defense and aerospace construction, the work was more than simply bricks and mortar. Were a worker to install technical electronic equipment, for example, was the work part of the process of "manufacturing" and covered by the Walsh-Healey Act? Or, was it "construction" and subject to the somewhat higher wage requirements of the Davis-Bacon Act? The issue was further complicated by prefabrication of components for general construction. Was a "batch plant" some distance from a construction site still part of the "site of work" for Davis-Bacon purposes? These issues were not to be easily resolved.Complicating matters further, Congress adopted the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act in 1965 mandating labor standards for service workers—but standards different from those in either Davis-Bacon or Walsh-Healey. Thus, a technical installation might be construction or manufacturing, or it could be a service operation. In this way, both employers and employees could suddenly find themselves on unfamiliar regulatory ground. There were also collective bargaining agreements to consider. How work was defined (as to craft or skill) might determine which union had jurisdiction.In 1962, a Special Subcommittee on Labor, chaired by Representative James Roosevelt (D-Calif.), was created which would provide the first full-scale hearing on the act in nearly 30 years.
Roosevelt promptly led the Subcommittee into the field for a tour of defense and space installations in order "to gain firsthand knowledge of the administration of the Davis-Bacon Act." Then, formal hearings commenced. The agenda was threefold.... (1) How the Secretary of Labor makes his determinations as to prevailing wages and what criteria he uses in making these determinations; (2) whether some type of review should be provided for prevailing wage rate determinations made by the Secretary of Labor; and (3) any other constructive proposals as to how the act may be improved or made more explicit.Although Chairman Roosevelt tried to maintain the stated focus, a wide range of complaints and suggestions were brought before the Subcommittee which met, intermittently, through three years. In large measure, they laid the foundation for most subsequent Davis-Bacon hearings, setting forth a 30-year agenda.When an interested party was aggrieved by a DOL decision related to Davis-Bacon, there was little that could be done other than to approach the Department, ask that it reconsider its findings, and hope for the best. Creation of a formal review procedure had been suggested at least as far back as the middle 1950s, but nothing had been set in place.Labor Secretary Arthur Goldberg appeared before the Roosevelt Subcommittee on June 7, 1962, and pointed to an "important innovation ... that we have under consideration right now" but which had been deferred "pending these hearings, so as to get the benefit of the viewpoints expressed here." The proposal was for the creation of "some internal review machinery within our own structure to review some of the determinations that are challenged."It quickly became apparent that creation of a review mechanism would be controversial. Various proposals, each with a constituency of its own, were presented. Some thought review by a panel within DOL would be adequate. Others argued that such a system would never be wholly free from the hand of the Secretary whose staff's decisions were being reviewed.
Judicial review was urged, but it was argued that it would be unworkable: that it would be cumbersome and costly, and that decisions would not be timely, an inconvenience to all involved and, possibly, causing delay of vital federal projects. Review by GAO was yet another option; but that, in itself, became a matter of controversy since the Comptroller General and DOL seem frequently to have been at odds over Davis-Bacon administration. If there were to be an in-house board, various practical administrative questions would need to be dealt with. For example, who would appoint its members? Where would it be housed? What would be its relationship to the Secretary, to the Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division within DOL, and to the Office of the Solicitor within DOL? If internal administrative appeal and review did not resolve a matter in dispute, would there be further options?As hearings continued through 1962 and 1963, no legislated review procedure had been finalized. Then, on January 3, 1964, Labor Secretary Willard Wirtz, dissenting from certain of the pending proposals, created administratively a Wage Appeals Board (WAB) which, he noted, would be "directly responsible to the Secretary of Labor." The three member Board was "appointed by the Secretary of Labor" with one of the members to be designated chairman.The Secretary's order affirmed that the Board "shall act as the authorized representative of the Secretary of Labor in deciding appeals, concerning questions of fact and law, taken in the discretion of the Board , from wage determinations issued under the Davis-Bacon Act and its related minimum wage statutes...." On questions of law, the order decreed, the WAB would act on the advice of the Solicitor at DOL who would also represent the Department at each proceeding.Six months later, when Labor Solicitor Charles Donahue appeared before the Subcommittee (June 23, 1964), he assured the Members that DOL's review process was in place and functioning. Some viewed the Secretary's action as a preemptive strike, since legislation to create a review procedure had been under active consideration by the Subcommittee through several years.
Representative Roman Pucinski (D-Ill.) noted: "I think that the Department just saw the handwriting on the wall." Ultimately, when the 1964 Davis-Bacon amendments were enacted, Congress did not include language dealing with a review procedure, the arrangement initiated by the Secretary remaining in place.Stability and fairness within the construction market had been primary considerations of the Davis-Bacon Act in 1931. It was alleged that, in the absence of a prevailing wage requirement, contractors would bid for public work on the basis of low wages and adverse working conditions that were inconsistent with those prevailing locally. In 1964, upon that same assumption, Congress extended the definition of "prevailing wage" to include fringe benefits.Members supporting a fringe benefit component argued that contractors, working under a collective bargaining agreement, can normally be expected to provide unit members with fringe benefits: health insurance, paid vacation time, etc. Non-union firms may offer similar benefits but they are under no contractual obligation to do so. Thus, some reasoned, non-union contractors who offer few or no fringe benefits to their employees might be able unfairly to underbid union or other non-union employers who offer a portion of their total compensation package in the form of such benefits.Critics suggested that addition of a fringe benefit component would increase the cost of public construction. They argued that it would be difficult to calculate the value of fringe benefit packages that often varied greatly from one firm or employment situation to another. Finally, some asserted that, even were a fringe benefit component justified, it ought not to be considered as a free-standing issue but, rather, as part of general Davis-Bacon reform.When the Roosevelt Subcommittee reported legislation adding a fringe benefit component to Davis-Bacon wage calculations, it seems to have generated little controversy. The provision was supported by the Johnson Administration. Called up in the House on January 28, 1964, it was approved by a vote of 357 yeas to 50 nays. The Senate approved the bill by a voice vote on June 23, 1964.The original Davis-Bacon Act of 1931 contained a provision which "[i]n the event of a national emergency" authorized the President to suspend the statute.
But, the authors of the Davis-Bacon Act had legislated in broad terms. The concept of "national emergency" was not defined, nor was it clear how long a suspension might last. Before considering the Nixon suspension of the Davis-Bacon Act in 1971, it may be useful to review, briefly, Franklin Roosevelt's suspension of the act in 1934.On June 5, 1934, President Roosevelt, acting upon the advice of the Secretary of Labor and the Administrator of Public Works, suspended Davis-Bacon as a matter of administrative convenience: to allow various New Deal statutes to function more smoothly. He made no attempt to define "national emergency" other than noting that concurrent operation of the two laws (the Davis-Bacon Act and the National Industrial Recovery Act) caused "administrative confusion and delay" which could be avoided were Davis-Bacon suspended.What transpired thereafter is not immediately clear; but, on June 30, 1934 (just three weeks later), President Roosevelt issued another proclamation. He stated that a revocation of the June 5 proclamation "would be in the public interest" and reinstated Davis-Bacon. The President does not appear to have offered any further public explanation for his actions.Through 1970 and 1971, President Richard Nixon, among other inflation-related concerns, expressed an intense interest in the wage-price structure in the construction industry. On January 18, 1971, he conferred with the tripartite Construction Industry Collective Bargaining Commission, chaired by labor economist John Dunlop, and urged that body "to do something about curbing the wage-price spiral in construction." Various options were discussed, Labor Secretary James Hodgson reported, including suspension of Davis-Bacon.Seeming to prefer a private sector solution, Mr. Nixon set a 30-day period during which the Commission should deal with the concerns he had raised. Negotiations followed. Despite meetings between AFL-CIO President George Meany, spokespersons for the Building and Construction Trades Department (BCTD, AFL-CIO), OMB Director George Shultz, Secretary Hodgson, Dunlop and others, no concrete solution was found.On February 23, 1971, Mr. Nixon, suspended Davis-Bacon.
He noted that the nation "is now confronted by a set of conditions involving the construction industry which, taken together, create an emergency situation." He noted that collective bargaining settlements "are excessive and show no signs of decelerating." He pointed to unemployment, to "more frequent and longer work stoppages," to a wage/price spiral in the construction industry and to their impact upon the general economy. Therefore, he suspended the act and, with it, "any Executive Order, proclamation, rule, regulation or other directive providing for the payment of wages, which provisions are dependent upon determinations by the Secretary of Labor under the Davis-Bacon Act."While President Nixon admitted that his action was directed at organized labor, he also stated that "wage rates on Federal projects have been artificially set by this law rather than by customary market forces." He affirmed his belief that "this preferential arrangement does not serve the best interests of either the construction industry or the American public at a time when wages are under severe upward pressures."In addition, the President set aside the Davis-Bacon provisions that had been written into the various program statutes (then, more than 50 of them) and declared, further: "I am calling upon States and other governmental bodies with similar statutes to take similar action."The suspension appears to have been less an attack upon the act, per se, than an effort to encourage labor and management (but, primarily labor) to adopt what the President believed was a more responsible wage/price policy. He observed: "It is evident now ... that decisive Government action is needed to protect the public interest while labor and management continue their efforts to attack the causes of this problem."Many questions arose. Were inflationary wage settlements in the construction industry (of which federal construction was only a part) what Congress had in mind in crafting the act's "national emergency" provision? Did the President have authority, under that provision, to set aside not only Davis-Bacon but also the prevailing wage provisions of the federal program statutes enacted by the Congress through several decades?
And, could the President preempt the various "little Davis-Bacon Acts" of the states?"We believe," Hodgson noted, that the "suspension should help produce more reasonable settlements throughout the industry and restore a better balance to the bargaining process." While he defined neither "reasonable" nor "a better balance," his intent seemed clear. If the unions would moderate their demands and accept less costly wage settlements, then balance could be restored and with it, perhaps, Davis-Bacon. Meany branded the suspension as "punitive against workers" and "an open invitation to unscrupulous employers to exploit workers." And labor analyst John Herling wrote that suspension had "brought cheer to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce" which for decades "has battled to remove Davis-Bacon ... from the Statute Books."Some of the state prevailing wage laws predated enactment of the federal statute. How would the suspension affect the practices of the several states? Peter G. Nash, then-U.S. Solicitor of Labor, declared: "The weight of authority supports the conclusion that States are now preempted (in effect a 'negative' preemption) from applying their prevailing wage standards laws to Federally-assisted construction work subject to DBRA [Davis-Bacon and Related Acts] wage protections prior to February 23, 1971." But not everyone agreed. In New York, for example, Commissioner of Labor Louis Levine affirmed that wages on public construction work would "continue to be based on the State Prevailing wage rate law."At the Administration's urging, labor and management in the construction industry continued to meet under Dunlop's guidance. On March 29, 1971, just over a month after the suspension, Mr. Nixon, in Executive Order 11588, declared that the suspension was no longer necessary "due to the establishment of an equitable stabilization plan." Having created the Construction Industry Stabilization Committee (a tripartite body appointed by the Secretary of Labor and directed by John Dunlop, part of a larger regulatory wage/price apparatus for the construction industry), he now restored the Davis-Bacon Act, together with the various supplemental regulations governing its implementation and enforcement.Davis-Bacon had been more-or-less continuously a focus of attention for the policy community since the middle 1950s.
During and shortly after the Carter Administration, however, the act passed through a period of somewhat higher visibility with arguments, pro and con, voiced with unusual vigor. The basis of this period of tension extends back to the original debates over the prevailing wage legislation.The bills that evolved into the Davis-Bacon Act of 1931 were crafted in part in response to rulings from then Comptroller General J. R. McCarl of the General Accounting Office (GAO) to the effect that the federal government, when contracting for construction work, was forced to accept the lowest responsible bid. The concept of "responsibility" during the period generally related to fiduciary matters and the ability of the bidder to produce the work for which a contract was let. Wages and working conditions were not factors to be considered. Given this interpretation, as Labor Secretary Doak explained, "the only course we had was to resort to legislation."Comptroller General McCarl had reviewed early versions of the Davis-Bacon legislation (not altogether favorably) and had suggested certain refinements. Although his advice was not immediately acted upon, the issues he raised remained and provided a basis for continuing GAO interest in the statute.Under Davis-Bacon, the General Accounting Office has responsibilities with respect to debarment of contractors found to be in violation of the statute and, in that context, with management of certain aspects of Federal expenditures. (40 U.S.C. 276a(2)) In addition, it has functions related more broadly to oversight of federal spending. Thus, beyond historical circumstance, the agency has reason to be interested in the act.On June 12, 1962, J. E. Welch, GAO Deputy General Counsel, appeared before the Roosevelt Subcommittee which was then conducting oversight hearings on the Davis-Bacon Act. Welch affirmed that since 1935, "we [GAO] have examined or passed upon practically every Davis-Bacon Act case in which irregularities have been reported." He stated that GAO's "experience indicates" that the methods and procedures adopted by DOL for administration of the act "have not kept pace" with the requirements of the period.
But, he assured the panel that GAO was neutral on whether "the Davis-Bacon Act should be either continued or repealed."A lengthy exchange attempted to clarify the relationship between GAO and DOL where Davis-Bacon was concerned. Though no precise conclusion seems to have been reached, it quickly became clear that the two agencies were not operating in complete harmony. Welch pointed to an ongoing series of negotiations between the Comptroller, the Solicitor at DOL, and their aides which had seemed more nearly to define areas of disagreement than to resolve conflicts. "We feel," Welch concluded, "that if the Department of Labor is to be given final responsibility [with respect to Davis-Bacon] that should be accomplished by appropriate amendment to the act."Both GAO and the Subcommittee appear to have set the issue aside at this point. However, GAO added as a supplement to its oral testimony extended documentation questioning DOL's administration of the act.Beginning in the early 1960s, GAO issued a series of reports that were generally critical of the Department of Labor's administration of the Federal prevailing wage law. With each report in turn, GAO's impatience with what it regarded as the flawed administration of the act seemed to grow. Finally, on April 27, 1979, it issued an extended summary review titled bluntly, The Davis-Bacon Act Should Be Repealed .The report was immediately controversial: the scholarship upon which it was based was questioned by some supporters of the act. Some wondered whether it was appropriate for the General Accounting Office to challenge, in so direct a manner, a policy which Congress had reaffirmed through nearly half a century. Nonetheless, this latter study, together with the several earlier reports, provided a rich resource for critics of the statute to draw upon.In urging Congress to reverse its support for Davis-Bacon, GAO set out a series of arguments. First . "Significant changes in economic conditions, and the economic character of the construction industry since 1931, plus the passage of other wage laws, make the act unnecessary." Second .
After nearly 50 years, DOL "has not developed an effective program to issue and maintain current and accurate wage determinations; it may be impractical to ever do so." Third . "The act results in unnecessary construction and administrative costs of several hundred million dollars annually (if the construction projects reviewed by GAO are representative) and has an inflationary effect on the areas covered by inaccurate wage rates and the economy as a whole."Although the 1979 GAO report was influential, judging from the frequency with which it has been cited, it did not win universal acclaim. During hearings in June 1979, several Members of Congress puzzled over GAO's activist stance. Representative Frank Thompson (D-N.J.), for example, asked Comptroller General Elmer Staats how much of GAO's work was undertaken at its own initiative. Staats responded, in part, by saying that he believed that "all of these" Davis-Bacon studies had been undertaken at GAO's own initiative.Ray Marshall, University of Texas economist and Secretary of Labor when the GAO study was released, charged that, as economic analysis, the report was "very sloppy" and had "little credibility." GAO defended its analysis but noted that "[w]ith minor exceptions [DOL] ... disagreed with almost everything presented in this report." Three congressional committees conducted hearings on Davis-Bacon during the period, focusing heavily upon the GAO report. At each, DOL and GAO representatives voiced areas of disagreement concerning the report and the act. Although the hearings did not resolve the methodological and interpretative conflicts that had come to surround the act, they did give higher visibility to the issue of Davis-Bacon reform.Coverage disputes of the early 1960s (whether to apply Davis-Bacon or Walsh-Healey labor standards protections) were never fully resolved. As mentioned previously, Congress passed the McNamara-O'Hara Service Contract Act (SCA) in 1965. It extended labor standards requirements to federal service contracts. Amendments to the SCA were adopted in 1972 and 1976—in each instance, over contractor objections. The jurisdictional issue, thus, became a three-way contest.The three statutes, similar and complimentary but not identical, have different regulatory and economic impacts.
Thus, which of the statutes applied to a particular project was of some considerable interest to employers, to workers, to the federal agencies as consumers of construction and goods and services—and to the taxpayer.In 1974, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) formed an inter-agency task force to review implementation of McNamara-O'Hara; but, when the review was complete, DOL refused to concur in its findings and a stalemate resulted. Again, in January 1977, during the transition from the Ford to Carter Administrations, OMB acted unilaterally, mandating administrative change by directive. This move was reversed two weeks later when the OMB's Office of Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP) withdrew the directive "in view of the need of the new Administration to consider the issues involved." Strains persisted.During the summer of 1978, a disagreement developed between OFPP and DOL. The OFPP Administrator advised the Department of Defense (DOD) that contracts for overhaul and rebuilding of certain aircraft engines would fall under Walsh-Healey (effectively, the federal minimum wage) rather than the locally prevailing rate under McNamara-O'Hara.At once, the House Subcommittee on Labor-Management Relations commenced hearings on the issue (August 1978); and, at the request of several key Members of Congress, OFPP stepped back, the matter being referred to Attorney General Griffin Bell for a legal decision concerning the OFPP's authority. In March 1979, Bell found in behalf of DOL. Whether a particular class of contracts is covered by Walsh-Healey or the SCA, Bell affirmed, is up to the Secretary of Labor. But he reminded President Carter that the Secretary was "subject, of course, to your supervision and direction as Chief Executive."Another interagency dispute developed in June 1979 when DOL notified the General Services Administration (GSA) that automatic data processing contracts, in which services were provided, would be subject to SCA. DOD objected that meeting SCA prevailing wage standards would raise wages and disturb the salary structure in the industry. Spokesmen for industry agreed. The contractor and the contracting agency found themselves in conflict with DOL.At this juncture, GAO issued a report arguing that McNamara-O'Hara should not be applied to service employees of data processing and high-technology firms.
Industry, taking a firmer stance, threatened not to enter into federal automatic data processing contracts at all if DOL continued to insist that SCA applied to workers in that field. An outright clash was avoided for the moment. Given the Bell decision (noted above), such policy conflicts were left in the hands of President Carter.In August 1978, OFPP convened an Inter-Agency Task Force to review Davis-Bacon and SCA operation. However, the Task Force seems to have been overtaken by events: the independent but somewhat parallel oversight by the House Subcommittee on Labor-Management Relations (summer 1978) and the determination rendered by Attorney General Bell (spring 1979), each discussed above. In addition, there were changes in staff within the several agencies which seems to have contributed to a shift both of focus and of priorities.The only product resulting from the work of the Inter-Agency Task Force may have been a listing of policy options and even this seems to have been "essentially shelved for two years." During hearings (summer 1979), Senator Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) requested from Labor Secretary Ray Marshall copies of all the recommendations of the Task Force and asked, as well, for copies of any policy options that were rejected. DOL agreed to ascertain what could be made available to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources.If the Task Force report (with the related documents) was made available to the Senate, it does not appear to have been generally available to the public. Early in 1980, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce filed for the materials under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). When the FOIA action failed to produce the documents, the Chamber brought suit in the U.S. Court for the District of Columbia (June 1980), seeking an order for their release. Legal action by the Chamber continued into 1981; but, in the wake of the 1980 elections and with the advent of the Reagan Administration, the issue may have been rendered moot. On March 18, 1981, Senator Hatch released a document titled: Options Paper, Inter-Agency Review of Contract Wage Laws .
A brief statement of the issues, the Options Paper offered few new insights, no new documentation and little information about the work of the task force.With growing Davis-Bacon reform pressure, the Carter Administration (December 1979) published proposed regulations governing the act. DOL then reviewed, through many months, the comments that it received and, on January 16, 1981, during the closing days of the Carter Presidency, published the regulations in final form to take effect on February 14, 1981.Once in office, President Reagan decided to review all pending regulations, rather than to allow them to go into effect as they stood. The Carter regulations were withdrawn for further study. Newly developed Reagan Administration Davis-Bacon regulations were proposed in August 1981 with a call for comment. On May 28, 1982, final regulations were published to take effect on July 27, 1982.In a memorandum to Vice President George Bush (and to members of the President's Task Force on Regulatory Relief which the Vice President chaired), Labor Secretary Raymond Donovan affirmed that "the final rule should be very well received by contractor groups." He also acknowledged that labor may react unfavorably." Secretary Donovan was right on both counts.Organized labor charged that the new regulations were a "back door attempt to nullify the law." The AFL-CIO's Executive Council added that the regulations are "a laundry list of virtually every proposal offered over the years" by contractor associations.In contrast, the Chamber of Commerce's Washington Report termed the regulations a "major improvement," noting that the business community "including construction trade associations ... has been working for years to abolish or amend the Davis-Bacon law and the regulations that implement it." The Associated Builders and Contractors noted approvingly: "These new regulations will definitely make it easier and more desirable for contractors to bid on federal projects."The regulations issued on May 28, 1982, may be viewed as a distillation of policy questions remaining from the initial discussion of the act in the 1920s and 1930s and reviewed, variously, since that time. They dealt primarily with five areas.First.
Under the pre-Reagan system, a wage rate paid to 30% of the workers in a craft in a locality, absent a more broadly-based rate, could be termed "prevailing" for Davis-Bacon purposes. The "30 percent" rule was now to be replaced by a "50 percent" rule.Second . It had been charged that DOL, in setting locally prevailing wage rates, had been "importing" urban rates for projects in rural areas. The new regulations placed strict limits upon this practice.Third . In determining Davis-Bacon wage rates, DOL was said to have included within its data base wages paid on other federal (Davis-Bacon-covered) projects which, it was charged, could have the effect of ratcheting up the base rate.Fourth . The new regulations expanded the potential use of "helpers" (unskilled, general utility workers) on federal construction projects. (Industry argued that this would reduce the cost of federal construction, open work options for the unskilled, and allow employers greater flexibility. Labor argued that it could lead to craft fragmentation, decrease employment of trained workers, and reduce the pay of workers employed on federal contract construction work.)Fifth . Under the Copeland "anti-kickback" Act of 1934, contractors are required to file weekly payroll reports and an affirmation of compliance with the Davis-Bacon pay requirements. The new regulations retained the affirmation of compliance but required submission of payroll records only in enforcement/compliance actions.All of the changes were opposed by organized labor. But, it appears, the provisions dealing with the "helper" regulations and the Copeland Act's reporting requirements were of primary importance to the unions.On June 11, 1982, the Building and Construction Trades Department (BCTD) of the AFL-CIO (with others) filed suit to block implementation of the new regulations. On July 22, 1982, just as the regulations were to be given effect, Judge Harold Greene of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia granted a preliminary injunction. Then, on December 23, 1982, Judge Greene issued a final decision, essentially favorable to the union position.On one point, Judge Greene ruled in favor of Secretary Donovan: that the Secretary had acted properly in substituting a new "50 percent" rule for the longstanding "30 percent" rule.
With that single exception, however, he declared the regulations invalid and "permanently enjoined [the Secretary and his agents] from enforcing or giving any effect to" the new rules. "[F]ifteen Secretaries of Labor serving eight Presidents have never altered the regulatory scheme. The present Secretary's claim to have discovered a wholly different congressional intent," Judge Greene affirmed, "rings hollow in the light of history."Both parties appealed. In January 1983, the Department of Justice, on behalf of the DOL, challenged Judge Greene's decision. In a parallel move, the BCTD announced that it would appeal that portion of Judge Greene's decision that was favorable to the Secretary: i.e., the issue of the "30 percent" rule.On July 5, 1983, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia issued a split decision. It stated that the legislative history of the act, though "not crystal clear," "suggests that Congress contemplated that the Secretary's authority to determine prevailing wages extended to finding the best way to do so."In general, the Court deferred to the authority of the Secretary. First . The Secretary was permitted to implement the "50 percent" rule and/or an averaging procedure. Second . The right of the Secretary to exclude distant urban data from rural wage rate calculations was sustained. Third . The Secretary was allowed to exclude wage data from federal projects except in cases where no suitable alternative data were available. Fourth . The Appeals Court partially approved and partially denied the new rules on the use of "helpers"—directing that DOL amend the proposed regulation. DOL promulgated a revised final rule dealing with "helpers" on January 24, 1989, which won court approval. Congress, however, then refused to fund implementation of the "helper" rule and it remained as an open issue. Fifth . The Appeals Court concurred with the District Court that the changes in the reporting requirements of the Copeland Act would weaken Davis-Bacon enforcement, would conflict with statutory intent, and, therefore, would be beyond the authority of the Secretary. The Department continued to experiment with language to alter the Copeland reporting requirements and the issue became the subject of various legislative proposals, none of them enacted.
Gradually, the Copeland reporting issue seemed to disappear from the policy agenda, the prior requirements remaining in tact.The U.S. Supreme Court, in January 1984, declined to hear a further appeal by the Building Trades. Thus, after five years of active consideration, DOL's "reform" efforts had been sustained in three of five areas. But in two areas, the "helper" issue and the Copeland reporting requirements, the position of the Department had been denied.As was discussed above, two suspensions occurred during the first 6 decades of the act's history. In 1934, President Roosevelt suspended the act, briefly, for reasons that seem to have amounted to administrative convenience. In 1971, President Nixon suspended the act, again briefly, justifying his action in economic terms: to apply pressure upon construction contractors and building trades unions as part of his wage/price control strategy.In early 1992, there were published reports that a third suspension of the statute might be under consideration: this time under the authority of President George Bush. Such consideration seems to have commenced during the first months of that year. In June, it was reported that a nationwide suspension was "more likely than not." But, months passed and the issue seemed to drop from view.On October 14, 1992, President Bush, by Proclamation 6491, ordered Davis-Bacon suspended for certain jurisdictions in the states of Florida, Louisiana and Hawaii. Taking note of hurricanes that had recently struck those states, the President declared: "... I find the conditions caused by Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki to constitute a 'national emergency' within the meaning of Section 6 of the Davis-Bacon Act." The suspension was to continue "until otherwise provided."In suspending the act, President Bush added several elements to the concept of "national emergency" which, variously defined, had served as the basis for presidential action. First , suspension might enhance employment opportunities. The DOL, it was noted, had estimated that suspension "could result in the creation of as many as five to eleven thousand new jobs in the construction industry in these States." (No explanation of the basis for this estimate was given.) Second , suspension might be viewed as an economy measure.
Payment of the locally prevailing wage (the Davis-Bacon rate, set by the Administration's Secretary of Labor) would "increase the costs" of rebuilding facilities in the several areas. Again, "more construction companies will be able to bid on Federal construction contracts" if Davis-Bacon were suspended. Third , there might be racial/ethnic considerations. In the Administration's opinion:For more than half a century, the Davis-Bacon Act has imposed non-market wage rates in the construction industry. Unfortunately, the Davis-Bacon Act has historically operated to exclude semi-skilled workers, including many African-Americans, Hispanics, and new immigrants, from work on Federal contracting projects.Fourth , there was the issue of the federal deficit. "In addition, by having the Government adhere to costly local wage settlements in the construction industry, the Davis-Bacon Act has added billions of dollars to the cost of Federal construction," the White House statement asserted.The assumptions set forth in the suspension order and accompanying documents were contestable and, almost at once, sparked dissent. But, laying aside such policy debate, some observers felt that Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki may have been less a reason for the suspension than a justification for an action already under consideration.Opinion was divided on the suspension. Segments of the construction industry, especially those associated with non-union (or anti-union) policies, applauded the suspension, some suggesting the economy could be strengthened were the act suspended everywhere. Organized labor was distressed by the President's action, suggesting that it was "a desperate attempt to win business support in electoral-rich Florida and Louisiana." AFL-CIO President Lane Kirkland suggested that residents of the affected states would be "victimized again" as "[u]nqualified contractors" become involved in the reconstruction process.Representative William Ford (D-Mich.), Chairman of the House Committee on Education and Labor, was critical of the Bush proclamation. Mr. Ford charged the President with using the "desperation" of residents of the affected areas "as an opening to cut wages and please his U.S. Chamber of Commerce campaign contributors." Reportedly, Mr.
Ford pledged to "look into the President's action when the new 103 rd Congress convenes." Early in the 103 rd Congress, Senator Daniel Inouye (D-Hawaii), a state the suspension was putatively intended to assist, introduced legislation which called upon the President to amend the suspension proclamation "to eliminate all references to the State of Hawaii and Hurricane Iniki."Through the years, many Members of Congress had been critical of the entire premise upon which the Davis-Bacon Act rested. If a suspension were useful, total repeal might be even better, some reasoned. Early in the 103 rd Congress, Senator Larry Craig (R-Ida.) proposed the latter. "Now, at a time when this President [William Clinton] is driving toward deficit reduction," Senator Craig affirmed, "... let me suggest to this President that, if he truly means to make meaningful cuts in the budget, bring down the deficit, bring down the debt, one of the ways to do it is to put Federal construction and private construction on an equal footing."Early in the 103 rd Congress, the concerns of Representative Ford and of Senator Inouye were addressed. On March 6, 1993, President Clinton issued a proclamation reversing that of his predecessor, George Bush. The Clinton proclamation (No. 6534) was a simple restoration of the full force of the Davis-Bacon Act with no explanation cited.The 1992-1993 Davis-Bacon suspension had been urged upon President Bush as a matter of policy through the spring of 1992 long before the hurricanes struck. His early reaction, reportedly, had been mixed. Whether his ultimate decision to suspend the act was primarily a response to storm-related developments or a reflection of broader policy considerations may now be a moot point. Other issues, however, remain.What constitutes a "national emergency" for purposes of suspension of the Davis-Bacon Act? What was the intent of Congress in this area? Does the concept of "national emergency" under Davis-Bacon allow the President to suspend the act for regional or local emergencies that may have only a tenuous impact upon the Nation at large: for example, an earthquake or a flood?
Is the presidential suspension authority limited to the Davis-Bacon Act, per se, or can it be extended to the various program statutes into which Davis-Bacon provisions have been incorporated? In areas where there are state and local prevailing wage requirements, how might these be affected, if at all, by a presidential suspension of Davis-Bacon? Were a President to suspend the act, how long could that suspension remain in effect? Traditionally, such suspensions have been short, but might they remain in effect so long as the suspending President remained in office?The crucial questions concerning suspension of Davis-Bacon may be legal and a likely subject of litigation, especially so were the duration of a suspension to be greater.The Davis-Bacon Act would continue as a source of contention through the 1990s. Some aspects of the Reagan administrative changes remained unresolved, notably the "helper" issue. Questions continued to be raised concerning the wage rate determination process. Simultaneously, some urged that the statute be repealed while others argued that it needed to be strengthened. And, with each Congress, the issues were raised anew.With the election of 1994, the Republicans found themselves in control of both houses of the Congress and Davis-Bacon became an immediate priority. As bills, pro and con, were introduced in each house, the Engineering News-Record (ENR) summarized:Senate and House Republicans are mapping simultaneous assaults on the Davis-Bacon Act in hearings on two bills to repeal the 64-year-old federal prevailing-wage law.Battle lines were clearly drawn.... On one side, lawmakers and interest groups are pushing for immediate repeal of the law. On the other side, labor and industry groups who see the GOP's strategic advantage are ready to discuss wholesale reform.Committees and subcommittees promptly scheduled hearings. Some forecast decisive action: either significant modification of the statute or, possibly, something more.On January 4, 1995, Senator Nancy Kassebaum (R-Kan.), the new chair of the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources, introduced S. 141 , an uncomplicated proposal that would have repealed both of the Davis-Bacon and Copeland Acts.
Terming Davis-Bacon "outmoded," Senator Kassebaum opined that the public "is ill-served" by the act's "wage rate and work rule restrictions." A hearing was conducted on February 15 and, on March 29, the bill was marked-up and ordered to be reported.Meanwhile, companion legislation appeared in the House. On January 13, 1995, Representative Cass Ballenger (R-N.C.) had introduced H.R. 500 , a proposal not only to repeal the Davis-Bacon and Copeland Acts per se but, also, to remove Davis-Bacon requirements from all federal laws into which they had been incorporated. Mr. Ballenger charged that Davis-Bacon "adds billions of dollars to Federal construction costs" and that repeal of the act—permitting payment of lower wages to construction workers—"would allow the Federal Government to fund more construction projects with the money which is being spent, or to get the planned construction done for less money." The bill was referred to the Subcommittee on Workforce Protections, of which Representative Ballenger was then chair. On March 2, the Subcommittee marked-up the bill and reported it to the full Committee on Economic and Educational Opportunities.Momentum, it seemed, was building; but support for repeal was not as clear-cut as it might at first have appeared. Nor were the lines, pro and con, drawn sharply along partisan lines.On August 11, 1995, Senator Mark Hatfield (R-Ore.), chair of the Appropriations Committee, with five other Republican Senators, introduced S. 1183 , the "Davis-Bacon Act Reform Amendments of 1995." The Senator presented the legislation as a compromise "that would be acceptable to the two major parties, namely the building construction trade unions and the contractors' coalition." He reviewed the history of the act and recalled that, as Governor of Oregon, he had signed that state's "little Davis-Bacon Act." Affirming his support for the prevailing wage concept, he stated:... the Davis-Bacon Act, as it now stands, indeed deserves some of the criticism that my distinguished associates level against it.
Nevertheless, its purpose of protecting the jobs of our Nation's construction workers must persuade us to reform, rather than repeal, the act.Senator Hatfield explained that the bill was the product of "long and arduous" discussions that had commenced in Oregon among representatives of industry and labor and had continued in Washington during the summer of 1995. He proposed three amendments to the existing statute.First, the threshold at which the act becomes applicable to Federal projects would be raised from $2,000 to $100,000. Second, the frequency with which contractors are required to file wage and benefit schedules would be changed from weekly to monthly. Third, trainees and apprentices would be excluded from the prevailing wage standard if they are enrolled in a training program that is registered with the Department of Labor.The bill contained other provisions as well: tightening here, expanding or redefining coverage there. Rather than repeal Davis-Bacon, he suggested, S. 1183 would rewrite that measure "so that it can serve its original and laudable purpose."As the summer of 1995 wore on, consideration of Davis-Bacon continued as Congress took up budget and appropriations measures and a variety of program statutes. Then, on October 12, Representative Curt Weldon (R-Pa.) introduced H.R. 2472 : companion legislation to the Hatfield bill. And, like the Hatfield bill, it was initially proposed by Republican Members of the House. As Representative Weldon explained, the bill has the "cosponsorship of 27 Republicans and the support of organized labor across the country as well as many of the largest contracting corporations in America." He enumerated the advantages of Davis-Bacon both for workers and for industry and asserted that repeal "would jeopardize the quality of life of every construction worker in this country."Although both bills ( S. 1183 and H.R. 2472 ) died at the close of the 104 th Congress, the movement for repeal of the Davis-Bacon and Copeland Acts came to an abrupt halt.
It was reported that, when repeal had actually seemed possible, more than "14,000 contractors have joined a coalition with construction unions seeking reform rather than repeal." Thereafter, through the end of the 20 th century, though repeal proposals continued to be introduced, they were not acted upon. Some limited oversight hearings were conducted but Congress now concerned itself primarily with the Davis-Bacon provisions of program statutes. Even with that more focused agenda, no change was made in the prevailing wage statute.In late August 2005, Hurricane Katrina gathered strength in the Caribbean and moved toward Florida and the Gulf Coast. The result was one of the greatest natural disasters in the history of the United States. Gradually, the impact of the hurricane was assessed. New Orleans had been especially hard hit. Diverse public and private funding was made available to the areas affected, while thousands of people were displaced from their homes, often to other states."Year after year," observed Representative George Miller, the ranking Democrat on the House Committee on Education and the Workforce, "Republicans have tried to erase this law [the Davis-Bacon Act] ... But they do not have the votes in Congress to do it." The hurricane, however, may have made a difference. A Washington Post headline on September 10, 2005, serves as an illustration: "In the Floods, Parties' Agendas Surface."There had been large pockets of poverty in the New Orleans area. When the announcement was made to vacate the city as the storm approached, the poor apparently had few resources to rely on. Further, a lack of transportation may have been critical and, perhaps equally important for these people, there was a lack of any acceptable destination for them. After the storm passed, many poor remained amid the ruins of a once thriving city: still without resources, but now without homes or jobs.It was reported that on Wednesday, September 7, when Budget Director Joshua Bolten briefed House Republicans on the President's supplemental spending request, "conservative lawmakers urged him to lift the wage rules" tied to Davis-Bacon. That same day, Representatives Tom Feeney (R-FL), Jeff Flake (R-AZ), and Marilyn Musgrave (R-CO) organized a letter to President George W.
Bush urging him to use his presidential power to waive Davis-Bacon requirements. Signed by 35 Members of the House, the letter affirmed that compliance with the wage processes of the Davis-Bacon Act could delay reconstruction and may "even raise total construction costs by up to 38%." The letter closed with a call for suspension of the act: "Faced with the massive rebuilding challenges ahead, we respectfully urge you to make a presidential proclamation to suspend Davis-Bacon until our country is once again whole."On September 8, 2005, President Bush suspended the Davis-Bacon Act as it relates to specific segments of the country: i.e., to portions of Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. He specified both the act and "the provisions of all other acts providing for the payment of wages, which provisions are dependent upon determinations by the Secretary of Labor" under the Davis-Bacon rules. The suspension would continue "until otherwise provided."Representative Charlie Norwood (R-GA) praised the President for his "quick action to strip away unnecessary bureaucracy that may hamper our ability to recover...." Davis-Bacon rules "are onerous and drive up the cost of any project to which they are applied...." The nation, he stated, "can't afford that kind of inefficiency, red tape, and inflated costs when we have an entire region to rebuild, largely at taxpayer expense." The Daily Labor Report, quoting the President, suggested that suspension "will result in greater assistance to these devastated communities and will permit the employment of thousands of additional individuals...." Or, as Representative Feeney reportedly stated: "Lots of people in Louisiana are willing to go to work tomorrow, and the market will set the wage...."Organized labor opined that the President's order "would allow contractors to pay substandard wages to construction workers in the affected areas." John Sweeney, the AFL-CIO president, opined that "employers are all to eager to exploit workers.
This is no time to make that easier." Further, he asserted, "Taking advantage of a national tragedy to get rid of a protection for workers that corporate backers of the White House have long wanted to remove is nothing less than profiteering." Edward Sullivan, president of the Building and Constructions Trades Department, likened the effect to "legalized looting." The New York Times editorialized that "By any standard of human decency, condemning many already poor and now bereft people to sub-par wages—thus perpetuating their poverty—is unacceptable."Somewhat anticipating the President's action, Representative Flake introduced the "Cleanup and Reconstruction Enhancement Act (CARE Act)" on September 7, 2005. The Flake bill ( H.R. 3684 ) would, whenever a "major disaster" has been proclaimed under the Stafford Act governing such matters, automatically suspend the Davis-Bacon Act for one year in the area of concern. A companion bill ( S. 1817 ) was subsequently introduced by Senator Jim DeMint (R-SC).In the wake of the President's action, several bills were introduced that would have had the effect of overturning the President's Davis-Bacon proclamation: H.R. 3763 (George Miller), H.R. 3834 (Frank Pallone, D-NJ), and S. 1739 (Edward Kennedy, D-MA). Senator Barbara Boxer (D-CA) had introduced a two-pronged bill ( S. 1763 ): first, to give employment preference to workers who have been displaced by Hurricane Katrina; and second, to restore the impact of the Davis-Bacon Act in the areas in which it had been suspended.In addition to legislation dealing specifically with the Davis-Bacon Act, two bills seemed to challenge Administration policy in that regard. Representative Miller had introduced H.Res. 467 , a bill "[r]equesting that the President transmit to the House of Representatives information in this possession relating to contracts for services or contraction related to Hurricane Katrina recovery that relate to wages and benefits to be paid to workers." The bill was referred to the Committee on Education and the Workforce—where, ultimately, it was rejected by a vote of 25 to 20.
A separate measure, but of similar intent, had been introduced by Representative Steve LaTourette (R-OH) and forwarded to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, chaired by Representative Young of Alaska.Gradually, conditions in the Gulf region became clearer and, in that context, a movement was discerned for re-institution of the Davis-Bacon Act. In late September, some 37 Republicans "signed on to a letter" to President Bush urging that his proclamation be rescinded. In a more varied appeal, LaTourette stated, "When you suspend Davis-Bacon, you also suspend the Copeland Anti-Kickback prohibitions" of the act "so you have no more certified payrolls." For those who are "... worried about profiteering and other things, reinstating Davis-Bacon is a good idea."In late October, about 20 Republicans reportedly attended a meeting with White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card at the office of Speaker Dennis Hastert. Card was described as "more than receptive" to suggestions from those supportive of Davis-Bacon and acknowledged that "they weren't saving any money" through the suspension. On October 25, Card called Representative LaTourette to invite him to a meeting at the White House the following day—October 26. During the White House meeting, Card was quoted as having said, according to LaTourette, that "there appeared to be no savings garnered from suspending the Davis-Bacon Act."On October 26, 2005, word began to surface that a change of policy was in the works; and, by late afternoon, it seemed to have been confirmed. The Bush Administration said, the Daily Labor Report reported, "... that it would reinstate on November 8 Davis-Bacon Act prevailing wage requirements for reconstruction projects in the hurricane-battered Gulf Coast region." The article continued, quoting Labor Secretary Elaine Chao, that "[u]pon review of current conditions in the declared areas, the administration will reinstate Davis-Bacon...."Although the Davis-Bacon Act has been in place for 75 years, it remains a focus of controversy.
Through the closing years of the 20 th century and into the 21 st century, aspects of its administration remain in contention, but most areas of dispute have roots in the enactments of 1931 and 1935.When the initial Davis-Bacon legislation was under consideration, few appeared to have entertained doubts that the Department of Labor would be able, rather easily, to render wage rate determinations whenever the stakeholders, employers and workers, were unable to agree with respect to what the locally prevailing wage actually was. In practice, wage rate determination has remained a core issue with respect to the Davis-Bacon Act—and remains as yet unresolved.Similarly, classification of workers has remained an issue, emerging most notably with proposals from the late 1970s to define treatment of "helpers" and to assess an appropriate pattern of utilization of apprentices: two quite distinct groups of workers. How workers are classified largely determines the rate at which they will be paid. It may also reflect the attitude of the employing firm toward trade unions and collective bargaining.Other classification issues have arisen along with the definition of various statutory provisions. What, for example, is meant by the "site of the work" for Davis-Bacon purposes? How should "off-site" work, however defined, be treated? Should truck drivers be Davis-Bacon covered? What ought to be the inter-relationship between Davis-Bacon and the other procurement statutes: i.e., the Walsh-Healey Act (setting labor standards for goods produced under federal contracts) and the McNamara-O'Hara Act (setting labor standards for service workers engaged under federal contracts)?Annexation of the Davis-Bacon Act to a variety of program statutes (or inclusion of a Davis-Bacon prevailing wage provision within such statutes) has added further complexities and opportunities for dispute, pro and con. For example, does a Davis-Bacon prevailing wage provision, added to a program statute, insure protection for the workers involved? It may or it may not, depending upon the phrasing of coverage and the relationship of the Davis-Bacon provision to the core statute.
When project funding is not directly provided to a grant/loan recipient through appropriated funds but through a revolving fund or tax credits, etc., is Davis-Bacon coverage modified or might the work be completely Davis-Bacon exempt?Finally, through the 1990s and beyond, dispute remains about the economic impact of the Davis-Bacon Act. Were Davis-Bacon repealed, how much might the federal agencies save—presumably by paying construction workers at lower rates? Or, would elimination of Davis-Bacon have implications that could augment both labor and total project costs? Does Davis-Bacon, with its associated regulations, encourage a higher quality of workmanship, enhanced productivity, and a reduced need for remedial work? Is there a connection between skill-transfers (apprenticeship training) and Davis-Bacon? How are various groups of workers—women, minorities, the unskilled, non-union workers—affected by the operation of the statute?After 75 years, as one reads through the hearings and floor discussions, it would seem that the verdict is still out. Indeed, there would also seem to be very little solid data upon which to base an assessment. Still (often, normally, on several occasions during each session of the Congress), the issue of Davis-Bacon is raised anew amid largely unqualified assertions of impact, pro and con, frequently without supporting empirical evidence.Since the 1930s, doubts have been raised about the need for the Davis-Bacon Act and about the ability of the Department of Labor to implement the statute in a reasonable manner. Through most of its history, however, such criticism seems to have been muted. In the 1950s, as Davis-Bacon provisions were increasingly added to program statutes, critics became more vocal, and increasingly so during the 1960s through the 1980s. In the mid-1990s, there seemed to be some suggestion that critics were making inroads on the act, and that repeal (or significant revision) was likely. Then, suddenly, the climate changed, and through the past dozen years, debate has cooled, though criticism has not entirely disappeared.The act has been the focus of numerous hearings, scores of floor debates, and has sparked an extended body of literature: studies, reports, analyses.
But, the thrust of congressional policy has been consistently toward expanded coverage and a strengthening of the act.Through the years, certain policy issues with respect to Davis-Bacon have remained under discussion; and, to the extent that these questions continue to be raised, they can be said to be unresolved. Indeed, some issues that were subjects of debate in the 1930s continued to be debated, largely in the same terms, and to provoke similar demands for administrative and/or legislative action. The growing Davis-Bacon literature, pro and con, with refutations and counter-critiques, seems to offer little that is new and appears to have left critical aspects of the act, its administration and its impact, unilluminated.The Davis-Bacon Act has now become an institutional part of wage structure and contracting practice within the construction industry. What the impact of repeal or significant modification of the act might be is not entirely clear. Should any change with respect to Davis-Bacon, whether pro or con, be extended to the related Federal contract labor standards statutes: the Walsh-Healey Act and the McNamara-O'Hara Act? This may be an area in which further study could be productive.As the 21 st century advances, several additional elements may be added to the debate over Davis-Bacon or have an effect upon the character of that debate.First . Some perceive a gradual weakening of the trade union movement, both in actual membership and in political influence. This could translate into a diminished public and congressional support for Davis-Bacon. And, if that perception is accurate, it could result in some refocusing of labor's legislative priorities.At the same time, it should be recalled that the Davis-Bacon Act was intended to promote stability within the construction industry as well as to protect labor standards. Might elimination of Davis-Bacon adversely impact industry, producing uncertainties with respect to wages as an element of the bidding process, alter manpower utilization patterns, increase the risk of accidents in the workplace, or render less effective skill development and transfer now commonly resolved through apprenticeship programs where there is Davis-Bacon coverage?Second . There has been a gradual change, over time, in demographics.
94-459 -- The U.S. Occupation of Haiti, 1915-1934May 26, 1994In the early twentieth century, Haiti suffered from a tumultuous political life and from chronic financial mismanagement. Eighty percent of the Haitian budget went to debt service, and U.S. government officials wereconcernedthat financial obligations to its own citizens might not be met. There was greater fear, also, that one among thewarring European countries -- especially France or Germany -- might establish a position of influence in the country,leading to naval bases that could endanger access to the newly constructed Panama Canal. These concerns wereheightened after the outbreak of World War I, when Haitian authority collapsed into bloody factional struggles inthesummer of 1915; the Administration of Woodrow Wilson determined to take action. In July 1915, Admiral WilliamB. Caperton, then embarked on the battleship Washington , was directed to land forces to establish orderandassume responsibility for administering the customhouses.With virtually no resistance, a landing party of some 330 sailors and marines took control of the capital within a few hours. (There were only two U.S. fatalities, and these may have resulted from friendly fire; Haitian fatalitieswere also minimal.) Admiral Caperton called upon additional U.S. forces to take control of other coastal areas;resistance by guerrilla bands in the more mountainous areas of the country was temporarily put down, ending withthecapture of Fort Rivière in mid-November. By the end of 1915, the marine presence was reduced to 100officers and some 1,600 enlisted men. Although the Marine Brigade was extensively deployed to help put downresurgentguerrilla activity in 1918-1920, for most of the rest of the occupation, the 1,200-1,400 marines were assignedgarrison duty, with some patrolling of the countryside.Once firmly established in the major population centers, U.S. officials quickly ensured the election by the Haitian National Assembly of an amenable president, Philippe Sudre Dartiguenave, who had served as the presidentof theHaitian Senate. As a result of continuing unrest, Admiral Caperton also established censorship and promulgatedmartial law. These emergency measures were not rescinded for over ten years. In another move to ensure an orderlygovernment, the United States presented the Haitians with a treaty that permitted a U.S.-nominated official to collecttaxes and make debt repayments and other disbursements.
The treaty, (1) ratified by Haiti in November 1915 andby the U.S. Senate the following February, also created a constabulary (or gendarmerie) composed of native Haitiansunder American direction to serve both as Haiti's military and police force. The treaty was to remain in force forten years and could be extended for another ten "if the purpose of this treaty has not been fully accomplished." InMarch 1917, the duration of the 1915 treaty was officially extended to twenty years.Despite the treaty, the Haitian National Assembly was uncooperative in its relationship with U.S. officials. The State Department drafted a new Haitian Constitution which would have validated the occupation and allowedforeigners to own property in Haiti. The assembly, unwilling to ratify the document, was dissolved when Lt. Col.Smedley D. Butler, a U.S. Marine officer serving with the Haitian Gendarmerie, entered the capitol in June 1917,toread a dissolution order that Dartiguenave had been pressured to sign. Unwilling to risk the election of anotherAssembly, U.S. authorities effected the approval of the new constitution by plebiscite (only 769 votes out of 100,000were negative) in June, 1918. The new constitution created a Council of State, whose members were appointed bythe Haitian president, to perform all legislative functions until an Assembly could be reconstituted at a time to bedetermined. Although the United States occupied the principal towns of the country, guerrilla bands remained in the mountainous interior of the country. Known as cacos (named after a Haitian bird of prey), these bandshad long played asignificant role in Haitian politics, fighting at times on behalf of one or more factions within the dominantfrancophone elite. Renewed attacks by guerrillas commenced in October 1918, and persisted for a number ofmonths(including a raid on Port-au-Prince in October 1919), until the marines and the Gendarmerie were able to neutralizethem by frequent patrolling, paying bounties for weapons turned in, and by eliminating their leaders. After 1920,there were only occasional outbreaks of caco violence.The Gendarmerie, whose name was changed in 1928 to the Garde d'Haiti, became an essential part of the administrative structure of the country. Officered at first by Americans -- largely enlisted marines -- who were paidboth by theU.S.
Marine Corps and by Haiti, the Gendarmerie, numbering 2,000-2,600 members, was deployed throughout thecountry and became largely responsible for maintaining law and order, settling disputes, and supporting publicworksprojects. It also served as Haiti's military force. Gradually, U.S. officers were replaced by Haitians, a process thatwas accelerated after 1929. Historians, otherwise critical of the occupation, acknowledge that Haitians had moresecurity intheir persons and property than they had ever previously known and that the Gendarmerie, during the occupation,functioned as an effective and impartial agency. (After U.S. forces departed in 1934, Haitian officers would becomemuchmore involved in political activities.)Throughout the occupation, U.S. forces suffered minimal casualties, totaling 10 killed and 26 wounded (with 172 other casualties). Complaints of brutality against native Haitians led the U.S. Congress to conduct hearings onHaiti and theDominican Republic in 1922. (2) The specialcommittee rejected the more serious charges and concluded that most of the abuses occurred during the effort to putdown the caco insurrection in 1918-1919. The counterinsurgency effortresulted in the deaths, by some estimates, of over 2,000 cacos . (3) Although affirming that cruelty was not officially countenanced, the committeenoted that there were at least ten instances of illegal executions by Americans. Once the caco rebellion was suppressed, there were virtually no physical attacks by Haitians on U.S. marines or civilians.After the 1922 congressional investigation criticized lack of coordination among U.S. officials in Haiti, U.S. civilian and military authority was consolidated. The senior U.S. representative from 1922 to 1930, General JohnH. Russell,USMC, served both as the senior marine in Haiti and as the U.S. High Commissioner, responsible to the StateDepartment. Reporting to him were U.S. officials (technically appointed by the President of Haiti) dealing withfinance, publicworks, sanitation, and agriculture, as well as the chief of the Gendarmerie. General Russell, described as aconscientious and somewhat imperious officer, became the most powerful figure in the country. He was laterappointedCommandant of the U.S. Marine Corps.The onset of the Great Depression and declining markets for Haitian products, especially coffee, produced economic hardships and contributed to increased unrest among a population long denied a political role. December1929 riots inLes Cayes threatened to spread throughout the country.
A detachment from the Marine Brigade in Port-au-Princewas sent to restore order, but a confrontation led to the deaths of at least 12 Haitians. Subsequent incidents wereendedwithout loss of life, but the Hoover Administration was concerned that it might become involved in hostilities thatU.S. public opinion would not support.In early 1930, President Hoover appointed a bipartisan commission headed by W. Cameron Forbes, formerly the Governor General of the Philippines, to investigate conditions in Haiti. (4) After several weeks in the country during whichtestimony was taken from all sectors of the society, the commission submitted a report that argued that the UnitedStates could not relinquish its responsibilities for ensuring the financial stability of Haiti, but made several proposalsforchanges, especially the separation of civil and military responsibilities, increasing the number of Haitians in thegovernment, and, in general, for less intervention in Haitian domestic affairs. (5) In November, General Russell was replaced bya State Department official, Dana G. Munro, who was appointed Minister rather than High Commissioner. AnExecutive Agreement was negotiated in 1932 providing for the complete Haitianization of the Garde by October1934 and forthe withdrawal of the Marine Brigade, two years prior to the expiration of the extended 1915 Treaty.Washington was nonetheless determined to pull out of Haiti at an earlier date. Arrangements were made for the election of a temporary Haitian president and the subsequent holding of national elections in October 1930 thatreturned astrongly nationalistic majority. The complete Haitianization of the Garde was completed. President FranklinRoosevelt paid an official visit to Cap-Haitien in July 1934 and the last marines departed the following month. Nonetheless, aU.S. financial adviser would remain until 1941 to oversee payments on the Haitian debt.The U.S. occupation in large measure accomplished its goals of stabilizing Haitian finances. Security for investors was a key concern of the U.S. Government and to a large extent became the justification for the occupationonce thepotential threat of European intervention disappeared with the conclusion of World War I. A $16-million U.S. loanwas negotiated in 1922 to consolidate Haiti's outstanding foreign debts. Efficient collection of duties and prompt,evenadvance, payment of debts owed to U.S. banks soon restored the country's financial standing.
Eventually, some 60% of Haitian revenues were expended under U.S. supervision, the greatest percentage going to debt repayment. Some critics, including the Forbes Commission, argued that monies used for advance repaymentof debtscould have been more usefully allocated to domestic projects. There is consensus, however, that Haitian financeswere honestly handled during the occupation and that steps were taken to insure that foreign interests did not takeadvantageof the country. (6) In the 1920s, annual Haitiangovernment revenues of $8-10 million were double that of the pre-occupation period; coffee production and smallbusinesses grew significantly, but little progress was made in establishing asound permanently economic base for the country.The occupation also resulted in the completion of a significant number of public works projects, mostly after 1920. Most important was the construction of roads and bridges throughout the country (some of which wascompleted through ahighly unpopular system of forced labor or corvée ). Although most of the 800 miles of roadswere not hard-surfaced, they greatly facilitated transportation between coastal areas and the rural uplands at a timewhen automobiles and truckswere being introduced into Haiti in significant numbers. A number of port facilities were erected, lighthouses wereconstructed, and a number of harbors were dredged. Efforts to improve agricultural productivity were complicatedby thesmall size of land holdings and a lack of accurate legal titles.The United States undertook a major effort to provide access to modern health care to the mass of the Haitian population that in some cases had never come into contact with trained doctors and nurses. A National PublicHealth Servicewas created with a network of some 153 rural clinics and 11 hospitals supervised by U.S. Navy doctors, and effortswere made to provide basic medical instruction to the population. This effort was financed by the Haitiangovernment atU.S. encouragement.The United States did not assume a responsibility to "build democracy," and U.S. officials did not devote significant efforts towards the encouragement of local self-government. Prior to the occupation, the Haitiangovernment had beenlargely the province of a narrow elite consisting of about 5 percent of the population.
The Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program, Title XVI of the Social Security Act, was enacted in 1972 and implemented in 1974 to assure a minimum cash income to all aged, blind, or disabled persons. SSI is provided to eligible aged or disabled individuals or couples who have limited income and resources. For adults, disability is defined as the inability to engage in substantial gainful activity (SGA) by reason of a medically determinable physical or mental impairment expected to result in death or last at least 12 months. In general, the worker must be unable to do any kind of work that exists in the national economy, taking into account age, education, and work experience. A child under the age of 18 may qualify as disabled if he or she has an impairment that results in "marked and severe" functional limitations. Adults aged 65 or older may qualify for SSI benefits without being disabled.SSI is administered by the Social Security Administration (SSA) and operates in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. To qualify for SSI, a person must be a citizen of the United States or a "qualified alien" and either a resident of the United States or the Northern Mariana Islands, a child of a person in the military stationed outside the United States, or a student temporarily abroad. Other requirements related to residence in certain public institutions, absence from the United States, filing for other potential benefits, and fugitive felon and probation/parole violator status also apply. In December 2013, the SSI program had more than 8.3 million recipients, who received over $4.6 billion in benefit payments. Of these recipients, more than 1.3 million were children under the age of 18, almost 5.0 million were adults between the ages of 18 and 64, and just over 2.1 million were adults aged 65 or older.The maximum federal SSI payment, referred to as the federal benefit rate, is $721 per month for an individual living independently and $1,082 for a couple living independently in 2014.
All but six states and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands supplement the federal SSI benefit with additional payments. Fourteen states and the District of Columbia have state supplements that are either partially or wholly administered by the SSA, and 34 states self-administer their supplements. Federal SSI benefit maximums are adjusted annually using the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) to reflect changes in the cost of living. After a 1.7% increase in 2013, a 1.5% COLA was applied for 2014.Most SSI recipients have other income; their countable income is subtracted from the federal benefit rate to determine their SSI eligibility and payment amount. In calculating countable income, SSI provides for certain income exclusions (e.g., the first $20 of monthly unearned income; the first $65 plus one-half of remaining monthly earned income). In December 2013, the average monthly federally administered SSI payment was $630.98 for children under the age of 18, $546.38 for adults aged 18 to 64, and $425.09 for adults aged 65 or older.SSA generally sends the monthly SSI payments directly to the recipient. However, SSA assigns representative payees to (1) minors, (2) individuals incapable of physically or mentally managing their own benefits, and (3) individuals declared legally incompetent by a court.SSI recipients living alone or in households in which all members receive SSI benefits are also automatically eligible for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). In most cases an SSI recipient is eligible for Medicaid.The SSI program generally counts all types of income in determining eligibility and payment amounts. In some cases, the income and resources of non-recipients are counted in determining SSI eligibility and benefit amounts. This process is called "deeming" and is applied in cases in which an eligible child lives with an ineligible parent, an eligible individual lives with an ineligible spouse, or an eligible non-citizen has a sponsor.
Hedge funds are essentially unregulated mutual funds. They are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets, including foreign currencies, precious metals, commodities, and derivatives. Some funds follow narrowly defined investment strategies (e.g., investing only in mortgage bonds, or East Asian stock markets), while others, the so-called macro funds, invest their capital in any market in the world where the fund managers see opportunities for profit.Hedge funds are structured to avoid SEC regulation. To avoid becoming public issuers of securities, subject to extensive disclosure requirements, they accept funds only from "accredited investors," defined by SEC regulations as persons with assets of $1 million or more. Hedge funds also avail themselves of statutory exemptions in the Investment Company Act of 1940, which governs public mutual funds. Mutual funds must comply with a comprehensive set of regulations designed to protect small, unsophisticated investors. These regulations include limits on the use of borrowed money, strict record keeping and reporting rules, capital structure requirements, mandated adherence to specified investment goals and strategies, bonding requirements, and a requirement that shareholder approval be obtained (through proxy solicitation) for certain fund business. An investment company becomes subject to this regulation only if it has 100 or more shareholders; hedge funds therefore generally limit themselves to 99 investors. (The National Securities Market Improvement Act of 1996 ( P.L. 104-290 ) broadened this exemption by permitting hedge funds to have an unlimited number of partners, provided that each is a "qualified purchaser" with at least $5 million in total invested assets.)Most hedge funds are structured as limited partnerships, with a few general partners who also serve as investment managers. Hedge fund managers are often ex-employees of large securities firms, who strike out on their own in search perhaps of greater entrepreneurial freedom and certainly in search of greater financial rewards. Those rewards, even by Wall Street standards, can be extremely high.
In addition to the return on his or her own capital, the typical hedge fund manager takes 15%-25% of all profits earned by the fund plus an annual management fee of 1%-2% of total fund assets.Data on hedge funds are available from several private sources, but estimates as to the size of the hedge fund universe vary considerably. Before the financial crisis that began in 2007, estimates were in the range of 8,000-9,000 funds, with about $2 trillion in assets under management. Large numbers of funds have closed as a result of severe losses in the bear markets of 2008; George Soros, one of the best-known hedge fund managers, has estimated that the value of capital under management may shrink by 75%.Starting a hedge fund is relatively simple, and, with a few quarters of good results, new hedge fund managers can attract capital and thrive on performance and management fees. Because many of them make risky investments in search of high returns, hedge funds also have a high mortality rate. Studies find that the rate of attrition for funds is about 20% per year, and that the average life span is about three years. Estimates of the average annual return earned by hedge funds differ. Some studies find that they generally outperform common benchmarks such as the Standard & Poor's 500, but others conclude that they have lagged. The short life span of many funds creates obvious difficulties for measurement, including a strong survivorship bias: the many funds that shut down each year are not included in return calculations. Annual return figures of course conceal a wide variation from year to year and from fund to fund. In any period, the law of averages dictates that at least a few funds will do extremely well. These success stories may explain the continued popularity of hedge funds with investors, despite the high fees that they charge, and the high risk of loss.Hedge funds are understood to be high-risk/high-return operations, where investors must be prepared for losses. Investors who accept the risks are seeking high returns or a means to diversify their portfolio risk.
If the fund (or its creditors) had tried to liquidate its assets and unwind its derivative positions in the troubled market conditions that prevailed, the result might have been extreme price drops and high volatility, with a negative impact on firms not directly involved with LTCM.Critics of the Fed's action expressed concerns about moral hazard—if market participants believe they will be rescued from their mistakes (because they are "too big to fail"), they may take imprudent risks. To the Fed, however, the immediate dangers of system-wide damage to financial markets, and possibly to the real economy as well, clearly outweighed the risks of creating perceptions of an expanded federal safety net. In the wake of the Long-Term Capital Management episode, systemic risk emerged as the major policy issue raised by hedge funds. The funds had demonstrated an ability to raise large sums of money from wealthy individuals and institutions, and to leverage those sums, by borrowing and through the use of derivatives, until they become so large that even U.S. financial markets may be at risk if they fail. Not all hedge funds borrow heavily and not all follow high-risk strategies. But many do, and there is no reason to think that other hedge funds will not amass positions as large and complex as LTCM's. In time, some of them can be expected to suffer equally spectacular losses. The systemic risk concerns may be summarized as follows:failing funds may sell billions of dollars of securities at a time when the liquidity to absorb them is not present, causing markets to "seize up"; lenders to hedge funds, including federally insured banks, may suffer serious losses when funds default—LTCM raised questions about their ability to evaluate the risks lending to hedge funds; default on derivatives contracts may disrupt markets and may threaten hedge fund counterparties in ways that are hard to predict, given the lack of comprehensive regulatory supervision over derivative instruments; and since little information about hedge fund portfolios and trading strategies is publicly available, uncertainty regarding the solvency of hedge funds or their lenders and trading partners may exacerbate panic in the markets.LTCM illustrates the dangers of hedge fund failure.
However, the funds' successes can also worry policymakers and regulators. Particularly in foreign exchange markets, manipulation by hedge funds has been blamed as a cause of instability (e.g., the European currency crises in the early 1990s and the Asian devaluations of 1997-1998). Hedge funds and other speculators can borrow a currency and sell it, hoping to profit if the currency is devalued (allowing them to repay with cheaper money). If the size of these sales or short positions is significant in relation to the target country's foreign currency reserves, pressure to devalue can become intense. To defend the currency's value may call for painful steps such as sharp increases in domestic interest rates, which have negative effects on the stock market and economic growth.In the United States, which has not been the target of such speculative raids, many argue that blaming hedge funds for crises is like shooting the messenger who brings bad news, and that speculators' profit opportunities are often created by bad economic policies. The effect of speculation on price volatility is an unresolved question in finance. While there has never been a conclusive demonstration that speculation causes volatility, the two are frequently observed together. Hedge funds, as the most visible agents of speculation in today's global markets, are looked upon by some regulators and market participants with a fair amount of suspicion.In April 1999, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets, which includes the Fed, the SEC, the CFTC, and Treasury, issued a report on hedge funds. The report cites the LTCM case as demonstrating that a single excessively leveraged institution can pose a threat to other institutions and to the financial system, and found that the proprietary trading operations of commercial and investment banks follow the same strategies in the same markets as the hedge funds, and they are much larger and often more highly leveraged. The general issue, then, is how to constrain excessive leverage.The Working Group concluded that more disclosure of financial information by hedge funds was desirable.
The report recommended that large funds be required to publish annual disclosure statements containing a "snapshot" of their portfolios and a comprehensive estimate of the riskiness of the fund's position, and that public companies and financial institutions should include in their quarterly and annual reports a statement of their financial exposure to hedge funds and other highly leveraged entities.In 2003, in response to continued rapid growth in hedge fund investment, an SEC staff report recommended that hedge funds be required to register as investment advisers. The staff set out several benefits to mandatory registration:funds registered as investment advisers would become subject to regular examinations, permitting early detection and deterrence of fraud; the SEC would gain basic information about hedge fund investments and strategies in markets where they may have a significant impact; and the SEC could require registered hedge funds to adopt uniform standards and improve disclosures they make to their investors.On October 26, 2004, the SEC adopted (by a 3-2 vote) a rule to require hedge funds to register under the Investment Advisers Act. The rule was controversial: opponents argued that hedge fund investors are sophisticated and know the risks, that the SEC already has authority to pursue hedge fund fraud, that systemic risk concerns are overstated, and that instead of trying to circumscribe hedge funds, the SEC ought to be encouraging registered mutual funds to adopt hedge fund investment techniques.The regulation fell short of what some critics of hedge fund behavior would have liked to see. The SEC would still not be able to monitor hedge fund trading in real time, and the possibility of another LTCM remains. However, the SEC explicitly decided against this course—the 2003 staff report found "no justification for direct regulation" and the adopted rule had "no interest in impeding the manner in which a hedge fund invests or placing restrictions on a hedge fund's ability to trade securities, use leverage, sell securities short or enter into derivatives transactions."The rule took effect on February 1, 2006, and some basic information on registering hedge funds appeared on the SEC website.
However, on June 23, 2006, an appeals court found that the rule was arbitrary and not compatible with the plain language of the Investment Advisers Act, vacated it, and returned it to the SEC for reconsideration. SEC Chairman Cox instructed the SEC's professional staff to provide the Commission with a set of alternatives for consideration.Another issue involves the "retailization" of hedge funds. As noted above, all fund investors must meet an "accredited investor" standard: they must have incomes of at least $200,000 and assets of $1 million. This threshold was established in the 1980s, and a much larger fraction of the population now meets the test, particularly since the $1 million includes the value of the investor's residence. The SEC has been concerned that relatively unsophisticated households may be putting their money in hedge funds, encouraged by market developments such as the introduction of funds-of-hedge funds, which accept smaller investments than traditional funds.A related investor protection issue arises from the fact that pension funds and other institutional investors are placing more of their money with hedge funds, meaning that unsophisticated beneficiaries may be unwittingly at risk of significant hedge fund-related losses, if the plan fiduciaries are not prudent and cautious.On December 13, 2006, the SEC proposed a regulation that would raise the accredited investor threshold from $1 million to $2.5 million in assets (excluding the value of the investor's home). If adopted, the rule would significantly reduce the pool of potential hedge fund investors, but would not be expected to have a strong impact on the largest funds, which do not depend on "mere" millionaires. The SEC received many unfavorable comments from investors who meet the current standard but would be excluded under the new limits: these investors do not wish to be protected from risks that the SEC might view as excessive. The SEC has yet to adopt a final rule raising the accredited investor standard.In February 2007, the President's Working Group issued an "Agreement Among PWG and U.S.
Agency Principals on Principles and Guidelines Regarding Private Pools of Capital." The document expresses the view that policies that support market discipline, participant awareness of risk, and prudent risk management are the best means of protecting investors and limiting systemic risk. The Agreement does not call for legislation to give regulators new powers or authorities to regulate hedge funds.In December 2008, the revelation that a firm registered as both a broker/dealer and an investment adviser with the SEC, Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities, had operated a multi-billion dollar Ponzi scheme raised new questions about the efficacy of market self-regulation. A number of hedge funds and funds-of-funds had placed billions of their clients' money with Madoff, but failed to detect the fraud. The Madoff case prompted calls for more stringent regulation of investment advisers, including hedge funds.The Obama Administration's 2009 white paper, Financial Regulatory Reform: A New Foundation , recommends that advisers to hedge funds (and other private pools of capital, including private equity funds and venture capital funds) whose assets under management exceed some modest threshold should be required to register with the SEC under the Investment Advisers Act. The advisers should be required to report information on the funds they manage that is sufficient to assess whether any fund poses a threat to financial stability.In the 109 th Congress, the House passed H.R. 6079 (Representative Castle), which directed the President's Working Group to study the growth of hedge funds, the risks they pose, their use of leverage, and the benefits they confer. The Senate did not act on the bill.In the 111 th Congress, H.R. 711 (Representatives Capuano and Castle) would remove the exemption in the Investment Advisers Act for firms with fewer than 15 clients, which was the figure at the center of the 2006 Goldstein decision. This would require hedge funds with more than $25 million in client funds to register as investment advisers with the SEC.H.R. 712 (Representative Castle) would require defined benefit pension plans to disclose their investments in hedge funds.H.R.
713 (Representative Castle) directs the President's Working Group on Financial Markets to conduct a study of the hedge fund industry, and report to Congress with any recommendations regarding hedge fund regulation.S. 344 (Senator Grassley) would limit the exemptions available under the Investment Company Act, requiring hedge funds with more than $50 million under management to register with the SEC.S. 506 and H.R. 1265 would change the tax treatment of offshore funds.S. 1276 would require managers of hedge funds to register as investment advisers, private equity firms, and venture capital funds, and would authorize the SEC to collect systemic risk data from them.Hedge funds are not seen as a principal cause of the financial crisis that erupted in 2007. They are, however, widely viewed as part of the "shadow" financial system that includes over-the-counter derivatives, non-bank lending, and other lightly regulated or non-regulated financial sectors. As part of sweeping regulatory reform legislation before the House and Senate in the 111 th Congress, certain hedge funds would be required to register with the SEC and to provide information about their positions and trading strategies to be shared with the systemic risk authorities.Under H.R. 4173 , passed by the House on December 11, 2009, managers of funds with more than $150 million under management would be required to register as investment advisers with the SEC. They would be required to report (on a confidential basis) certain portfolio information of interest to the Federal Reserve or other systemic risk authorities. The bill provides exemptions for advisers to venture capital funds and small business investment corporations (SBICs).Senator Dodd's Restoring American Financial Stability Act, as ordered reported by the Senate Banking Committee on March 22, 2010, includes similar provisions regarding registration and reporting of systemic risk data. The Senate version also exempts venture capital funds, private equity funds, and SBICs. It sets the SEC registration threshold for all investment advisers at $100 million in assets under management. Advisers below that figure would register with the states.
This statute provides, in part: "The Secretary of the military department concerned may make a military animal of such military department available for adoption ... under circumstances as follows: (1) At the end of the animal's useful life. (2) Before the end of the animal's useful life, if such Secretary ... determines that unusual or extraordinary circumstances justify [it]. (3) When the animal is otherwise excess to the needs of such military department." The statute defines "military animal" as "[a] military working dog" or "[a] horse owned by the Department of Defense." When this statute was first enacted in 2000, it applied only to military working dogs; prior to then, under Department of Defense policy, such dogs were caged, sometimes for as long as a year, and then euthanized. See 146 Cong. Rec. H 9599 (daily ed. October 10, 2000). The statute was amended to cover horses in 2006.This statute establishes an African Elephant Conservation Fund, from which the Secretary of the Interior may provide financial assistance "for approved projects for research, conservation, management, or protection of African elephants." It requires the Secretary to establish a moratorium on the importation of raw and worked ivory from an ivory producing country that does not meet specified criteria, including being a party to CITES and adhering to the CITES Ivory Control System. ("CITES" is the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.)The act imposes civil and criminal penalties on any person who, among other things, imports raw ivory from any country other than an ivory producing country, or from a country for which a moratorium is in effect, or who exports raw ivory from the United States. A person who furnishes information that leads to a civil penalty or a criminal conviction under the act may be rewarded up to one-half of any criminal or civil penalty or fine, or $25,000, whichever is less.Section 794 of P.L.
109-97 (2005) provides:Effective 120 days after the date of enactment of this act, none of the funds made available by this act may be used to pay the salaries or expenses of personnel to inspect horses under section 3 of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 603) or under guidelines issued under section 903 [of] the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (7 U.S.C. 1901 note; P.L. 104-127 ).Because the Federal Meat Inspection Act, 21 U.S.C. § 603, requires horses (and specified other mammals) to be inspected before they may be slaughtered for human consumption, § 794 of P.L. 109-97 , by precluding appropriated funds from being used to pay inspectors' salaries and expenses to inspect horses, would have effectively prohibited the slaughter of horses for human consumption from March 10, 2006, until September 30, 2006. The Department of Agriculture, however, on February 8, 2006, issued a regulation allowing slaughter plants to pay for inspections by the Department of Agriculture's Food Safety and Inspection Service so that horses could continue to be slaughtered for human consumption. 9 C.F.R. § 352.19.The 110 th Congress prevented the Department of Agriculture from continuing to charge slaughter plants for inspections, and it thereby effectively prohibited the slaughter of horses for human consumption. It accomplished this by prohibiting appropriated funds from being used not only, as in P.L. 109-97 , to pay salaries and expenses under the Federal Meat Inspection Act and the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996, but also from being used to implement or enforce 9 C.F.R. § 352.19, under which the Department of Agriculture allowed slaughter plants to pay for inspections. P.L. 110-161 , § 741, 121 Stat. 1881 (2007); P.L. 110-329 , Div. A, § 101, 122 Stat. 3574-3575 (2008) (incorporating provisions of P.L. 110-161 ).This statute makes it a crime (1) while in an aircraft, to shoot any bird, fish, or other animal, or (2) to use an aircraft to harass any bird, fish, or other animal.
These prohibitions do not apply to persons employed by or licensed by a state or the federal government to administer or protect "land, water, wildlife, domesticated animals, human life, or crops."Sections 1313-1314 of this act, 16 U.S.C. §§ 3201-3202, authorize the Secretary of the Interior to designate zones within national preserves in Alaska "where and when no hunting, fishing, trapping, or entry may be permitted," and prohibits "the taking of fish and wildlife" in national parks or national park system monuments in Alaska, except as specified in the act.Section 1005 of the act, as amended in 1990, 16 U.S.C. § 3145, provides that the Secretary of the Interiorshall work closely with the State of Alaska and Native Village and Regional Corporations in evaluating the impact of oil and gas exploration, development, production, and transportation and other human activities on the wildlife resources of these lands, including impacts on the Arctic and Porcupine caribou herds, polar bears, muskox, grizzly bear, wolf, wolverine, seabirds, shorebirds, and migratory waterfowl.This statute (together with the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. §§ 791-794) prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities in employment, public services, and public accommodations. Discrimination includes refusing to make reasonable accommodations for individuals with disabilities, and a reasonable accommodation generally includes permitting the use of service animals, such as seeing eye dogs. See, e.g., 28 C.F.R. § 36.302(c). See also, " Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3604 ," discussed below.This statute authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to take various actions for the protection of fishery resources.This statute directs the Secretary of Agriculture:to conduct investigations, experiments, and tests as he may deem necessary in order to determine, demonstrate, and promulgate the best methods of eradication, suppression, or bringing under control on national forests and other areas of the public domain as well as on State, Territory, or privately owned lands of mountain lions, wolves, bobcats, prairie dogs, gophers, ground squirrels, jack rabbits, brown tree snakes, and other animals injurious to agriculture, horticulture, forestry, animal husbandry, wild game animals, fur-bearing animals, and birds.This statute was enacted in 1931 (though "brown tree snakes" were added in 1991).
..." The statute defines "animal enterprise" as:(A) a commercial or academic enterprise that uses or sells animals or animal products for profit, food or fiber production, agriculture, education, research, or testing;(B) a zoo, aquarium, animal shelter, pet store, breeder, furrier, circus, rodeo, or other lawful competitive animal event; or(C) any fair or similar event intended to advance agricultural arts and sciences.This statute authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture, if he determines it to be necessary to prevent the introduction into or dissemination with the United States of any pest or disease of livestock, to prohibit or restrict, among other things, the importation or exportation of any animal into or from the United States, the movement in interstate commerce of any animal, or the use of any means of conveyance in connection with the importation or entry of livestock. The statute also authorizes the Secretary, if it is necessary for the above purpose, to order the destruction or removal from the United States of any animal, or to seize, quarantine, or dispose of any animal.The AWA authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to "promulgate standards to govern the humane handling, care, treatment, and transportation of animals by dealers, research facilities, and exhibitors." 7 U.S.C. § 2143(a)(1). Such standards must include requirements "for animal care, treatment, and practices in experimental procedures to ensure that animal pain and distress are minimized. ..." 7 U.S.C. § 2143(a)(3)(A). The act also requires the Secretary to "promulgate standards to govern the transportation in commerce, and the handling, care, and treatment in connection therewith, by intermediate handlers, air carriers, or other carriers, of animals consigned by any ... person ... for transportation in commerce." 7 U.S.C. § 2143(a)(4).The AWA's definition of "animal" makes the act applicable to any warmblooded animal used "for research, testing, experimentation, or exhibition purposes, or as a pet; but such term excludes (1) birds, rats of the genus Rattus, and mice of the genus Mus, bred for use in research, (2) horses not used for research purposes, and (3) other farm animals. ..." 7 U.S.C. § 2132(g). Prior to this provision's amendment by P.L.
2131 et seq.)." No report appears to have been written.The AWA requires every research facility to establish an Institutional Animal Committee of at least three members, at least one of whom shall not be affiliated in any way with the facility and who is intended to represent "general community interests in the proper care and treatment of animals." The Committee's responsibilities include to review practices involving pain to animals and to file a report with the Secretary. 7 U.S.C. § 2143(b).The AWA also provides for the licensing of dealers and exhibitors (7 U.S.C. § 2133) and prohibits research facilities from purchasing dogs or cats from unlicensed dealers or exhibitors (7 U.S.C. § 2137). The act defines "dealer" in part as a person who, for compensation, transports, buys, or sells any animal "for research, teaching, exhibition, or use as a pet," but it excludes from the definition a retail pet store that does not sell "animals to a research facility, an exhibitor, or a dealer" (7 U.S.C. § 2132(f)). The act defines "exhibitor" to include carnivals, circuses, and zoos, but to exclude retail pet stores, state and country fairs, livestock shows, rodeos, and purebred dog and cat shows (7 U.S.C. § 2132(h)).The AWA also prohibits dealers and exhibitors from selling or otherwise disposing of any dog or cat within five business days after they acquire it, except that this requirement does not apply to operators of auction sales. 7 U.S.C. § 2135. A 1990 amendment requires public and private pounds and shelters, and research facilities licensed by the Department of Agriculture, to "hold and care for" any dog or cat they acquire "for a period of not less than five days to enable such dog or cat to be recovered by its original owner or adopted by other individuals before such entity sells such dog or cat to a dealer." 7 U.S.C. § 2158(a). Does this provision prohibit a pound, shelter, or research facility from euthanizing a dog or cat before five days?
110-234 , § 14207(b) (2008) then increased the maximum penalty to a fine and five years' imprisonment per violation.The animal fighting section of the AWA also prohibits knowingly using the mail or any instrumentality of interstate commerce to advertise an animal, or a sharp instrument, for use in an animal fighting venture, or to promote or further an animal fighting venture, except that this prohibition applies "to fighting ventures involving live birds only if the fight is to take place in a State where it would be in violation of the laws thereof."This statute makes it unlawful for any United States citizen, unless authorized by the Director of the National Science Foundation, to engage in commerce in any native animal or native bird taken in Antarctica.This statute implements the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and makes it unlawful to harvest, or knowingly to engage in commerce in any Antarctic marine living resource harvested in violation of the Convention.This statute establishes the Asian Elephant Conservation Fund and directs the Secretary of the Interior to use amounts in the Fund for projects for the conservation of Asian elephants.The statute requires the Secretary of Commerce, in cooperation with the Secretary of the Interior, to develop and implement a program to support the interstate fishery management efforts of the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission.This statute limits salmon fishing pursuant to the Convention for the Conservation of Salmon in the North Atlantic Ocean.This statute directs the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of the Interior to jointly declare a moratorium on fishing for Atlantic striped bass within the coastal waters of any state that does not comply with the plan for managing Atlantic striped bass that is adopted by the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission.This statute authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to promulgate regulations to "limit the size of the fish and the quantity of the catch which may be taken from each area ...
1184 (1996), provides that "the Secretary of Agriculture may issue guidelines for the regulation of the commercial transportation of equine for slaughter by persons regularly engaged in that activity within the United States." Specifically, "the Secretary of Agriculture shall review the food, water, and rest provided to equine for slaughter in transit, the segregation of stallions from other equine during transit, and such other issues as the Secretary considers appropriate." The Secretary's regulations implementing this statute were issued in 2001 and are published at 9 C.F.R. Part 88.P.L. 101 - 511 , § 8019 (1990) provides:None of the funds appropriated by this Act or hereafter shall be used to purchase dogs or cats or otherwise fund the use of dogs or cats for the purpose of training Department of Defense students or other personnel in surgical or other medical treatment of wounds produced by any type of weapon: Provided , That the standards of such training with respect to the treatment of animals shall adhere to the Federal Animal Welfare Law and to those prevailing in the civilian medical community.This provision, without the words "or hereafter," had been included in Department of Defense appropriations statutes since P.L. 98 - 212 , § 791 (1984). However, because of the words "or hereafter" in the language quoted above, this prohibition on the use of funds continues to operate unless it is repealed.Other Department of Defense appropriations statutes use the phrase "this Act or any other Act" instead of "this Act or hereafter." The Comptroller General has "held that the words 'or any other act' do not indicate futurity, but merely extend the effect of the provisions to other appropriations available in that fiscal year." 65 Comp. Gen. 588, 589 (1986). The following example of the use of this phrase in connection with the use of animals in research appeared in P.L. 103 - 139 , § 8044 (1993), and P.L.
104 - 61 , § 8034 (1995):None of the funds provided in this Act or any other Act shall be available to conduct bone trauma research at any Army Research Laboratory until the Secretary of the Army certifies that the synthetic compound to be used in the experiments is of such a type that its use will result in a significant medical finding, the research has military application, the research will be conducted in accordance with the standards set by an animal care and use committee, and the research does not duplicate research already conducted by a manufacturer or any other research organization.Finally, some limitations on the use of Department of Defense funds for animal research have applied only to a particular appropriations statute. For example, P.L. 103 - 139 § 8043 (1993), and P.L. 104 - 61 , § 8032 (1995), provide:None of the funds appropriated by this Act shall be available for payments under the Department of Defense contract with the Louisiana State University Medical Center involving the use of cats for Brain Missile Wound Research. ...P.L. 102 - 394 , § 213 (1992) provides:No funds appropriated under this Act or subsequent Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Acts shall be used by the National Institutes of Health, or any other Federal agency, or recipient of Federal funds on any project that entails the capture or procurement of chimpanzees obtained from the wild. For purposes of this section, the term "recipient of Federal funds" includes private citizens, corporations, or other research institutions located outside the United States that are recipients of Federal funds.This provision had previously appeared, without the reference to subsequent acts, in P.L. 101 - 166 , § 214 (1989), P.L. 101 - 517 , § 211 (1990), and P.L. 102 - 170 , § 213 (1991).This statute, enacted as P.L.
106 - 152 (1999), makes it a crime knowingly to create, sell, or possess any visual or audio "depiction of animal cruelty with the intention of placing that depiction in interstate or foreign commerce for commercial gain." It provides an exception for "any depiction that has serious religious, political, scientific, educational, journalistic, historical, or artistic value." The statute was aimed at outlawing "crush video" films, in which small animals are crushed to death. A federal court of appeals has held that the statute violates the First Amendment's guarantee of freedom of speech, and the Supreme Court has agreed to review the case. United States v. Stevens , 533 F.3d 218 (3d Cir. 2008) (en banc), cert. granted , No. 08-769 (Apr. 20, 2009).This statute is also known as the "Federal Aid in Fish Restoration Act" and the "Fish Restoration and Management Projects Act." It directs the Secretary of the Interior "to cooperate with the States through their respective State fish and game departments in fish restoration and management projects." It includes the New England Fishery Resources Restoration Act of 1990, 16 U.S.C. § 777e-1. This statute was amended by the Wildlife and Sport Fish Restoration Programs Improvement Act of 2000, discussed below.This statute provides, in full:Subject to applicable regulations under this subtitle and title III of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 U.S.C. 251 et seq.), horses and mules belonging to the Federal Government that have become unfit for service may be destroyed or put out to pasture, either on pastures belonging to the Government or those belonging to financially sound and reputable humane organizations whose facilities permit them to care for the horses and mules during the remainder of their natural lives, at no cost to the Government.This statute, P.L. 106 - 476 , §§ 1441-1443 (2000), makes it unlawful to import into, or export from, the United States any dog or cat fur product; or to engage in interstate commerce in any dog or cat fur product.This statute, as amended by § 5 of the International Dolphin Conservation Program Act, P.L.
105 - 42 (1997), makes it a violation of § 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act, 15 U.S.C. § 45,for any producer, importer, exporter, distributor, or seller of any tuna product that is exported from or offered for sale in the United States to include on the label of that product the term "dolphin safe" or any other term or symbol that falsely claims or suggests that the tuna contained in the product were harvested using a method of fishing that is not harmful to dolphins if the product contains tuna harvested—(A) on the high seas by a vessel engaged in driftnet fishing; or(B) outside the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean by a vessel using purse seine nets ...(C) in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean by a vessel using a purse seine net unless the tuna meet the requirements for being considered dolphin safe under paragraph (2). ...Violators are subject to a civil penalty of up to $100,000.This statute finds that "the use of long plastic driftnets is a fishing technique that may result in the entanglement and death of enormous numbers of target and nontarget marine resources in the waters of the North Pacific Ocean, including the Bering Sea." It therefore provides that the Secretary of Commerce, through the Secretary of State, shall negotiate with foreign governments to monitor driftnet fishing, and shall evaluate the feasibility of various methods of reducing the number of driftnets discarded or lost at sea.The Driftnet Act Amendments of 1990, 16 U.S.C. § 1826, incorporate and expand upon provisions of the Driftnet Impact Monitoring, Assessment, and Control Act of 1987.This statute makes it unlawful to fish for designated species of tuna within the "Area Agreement" specified in the act without a license, or in contravention of regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Commerce.This statute authorizes the Secretary of the Interior (the Secretary of Commerce in the case of marine mammals) to promulgate lists of species which are endangered or threatened (defined as "likely to become ... endangered") and to designate critical habitats of such species.
One form of discrimination based on handicap is "a refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when such accommodations may to necessary to afford [a handicapped] person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling." HUD has determined that allowing seeing eye dogs is a reasonable accommodation.The Consumer Product Safety Commission, which administers this statute, adopted a policy statement on animal testing "intended to minimize the number of animals tested and to reduce the pain associated with such tests." The statement notes "that neither the FHSA nor the Commission's regulations require any firm to perform animal tests," although it adds that "animal testing may be necessary in some cases." 49 Fed. Reg. 22522 (May 30, 1984).This statute makes it a crime "willfully and maliciously" to harm a dog or horse used by a federal agency in law enforcement.This statute authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to approve state conservation plans for "nongame fish and wildlife," which are defined as "wild vertebrate animals that are in an unconfined state and that—(A) are not ordinarily taken for sport, fur, or food ...; (B) are not listed as endangered species or threatened species ... and (C) are not marine mammals. ..." A 1988 amendment (adding 16 U.S.C. § 2912) requires the Secretary to undertake research and conservation activities concerning population trends of, and the effects of environmental changes and human activities on, "migratory nongame birds."This statute authorizes the Secretary of the Interior:to provide assistance to, and cooperate with, Federal, State, and public or private agencies and organizations in the development, protection, rearing, and stocking of all species of wildlife, resources thereof, and their habitat, and in controlling losses of the same from disease or other causes, in minimizing damages from overabundant species, in providing public shooting and fishing areas.
...In addition to containing numerous amendments of the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act and the Atlantic Tunas Convention Act of 1975, this statute includes the Dolphin Protection Consumer Information Act, which this report summarizes separately.This statute funds "research designed to increase our knowledge concerning agricultural production systems that" serve six specified purposes, one of which is to "promote the well being of animals."This statute prohibits the "taking" (defined as to "harass, hunt, capture, or kill") of fur seals in the North Pacific Ocean or on any lands or waters under the jurisdiction of the United States, or to engage in commerce in fur seals' skins taken contrary to the act or the Interim Convention on the Conservation of North Pacific Fur Seals.The act contains an exception allowing taking by "Indians, Aleuts, and Eskimos who dwell on the coasts of the North Pacific Ocean," and authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to permit taking for "educational, scientific, or exhibition purposes." The act also directs the Secretary to administer the fur seal rookeries on the Pribilof Islands to "ensure that activities on such Islands are consistent with the purposes of conserving, managing, and protecting the North Pacific fur seals and other wildlife. ..." The 1983 amendments to the act repealed the Protection of Sea Otters on the High Seas Act, formerly 16 U.S.C. §§ 1171-1172, as unnecessary because of the enactment of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972.This statute "established in the Multinational Species Conservation Fund a separate account to be known as the 'Great Ape Conservation Fund.'" The Secretary of the Interior shall use the fund for projects that he approves for the conservation of great apes.The purpose of this statute is "(1) to implement the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas ... , and (2) to establish a system of permitting, reporting, and regulation for vessels of the United States fishing on the high seas."This statute makes it a crime to exhibit, or transport for the purpose of exhibition, any "sore" horse, which is a horse whose feet have been injured in order to alter the horse's gait.
The Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to enforce the act.The Horse Protection Act also provides that "no horse may be exported by sea from the United States, or any of its territories or possessions, unless such horse is part of a consignment of horses with respect to which a waiver has been granted" by the Secretary of Commerce. Such waivers may be granted only "if the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, determines that no horse in that consignment is being exported for purposes of slaughter."The central provision of the Humane Slaughter Act (HSA) reads:No method of slaughter or handling in connection with slaughtering shall be deemed to comply with the public policy of the United States unless it is humane. Either of the following two methods of slaughtering and handling are hereby found to be humane:(a) in the case of cattle, calves, horses, mules, sheep, swine, and other livestock, all animals are rendered insensible to pain by a single blow or gunshot or an electrical, chemical or other means that is rapid and effective, before being shackled, hoisted, thrown, cast, or cut; or(b) by slaughtering in accordance with the ritual requirements of the Jewish faith or any other religious faith that prescribes a method of slaughter whereby the animal suffers loss of consciousness by anemia of the brain caused by the simultaneous and instantaneous severance of the carotid arteries with a sharp instrument and handling in connection with such slaughtering.The Humane Slaughter Act is enforced by the Secretary of Agriculture under provisions of the Federal Meat Inspection Act, 21 U.S.C. §§ 603(b), 610(b), 620(a). The HSA does not apply to chickens or other birds. In 2002, P.L. 107-171 , § 10815, 7 U.S.C. § 1907, added a section to the HSA directing the Secretary of Agriculture to submit a report to Congress on practices involving nonambulatory livestock (commonly known as "downed animals").
It also authorized the Secretary, based on the findings of the report, to promulgate regulations to provide for the humane treatment of such animals.This statute provides that the Interagency Coordinating Committee on the Validation of Alternative Methods (ICCVAM) shall, among other things, "[r]eview and evaluate new or revised or alternative test methods," and "[f]acilitate appropriate interagency and international harmonization of acute or chronic toxicological test protocols that encourage the reduction, refinement, or replacement of animal test methods."The ICCVAM was established by the Director of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences pursuant to section 463A(b) of the Public Health Services Act (NIEHS), 42 U.S.C. § 285 l -1(b). The ICCVAM Authorization Act of 2000 requires the Director of the NIEHS to designate the ICCVAM "as a permanent interagency coordinating committee of the Institute [the NIEHS] under the National Toxicology Program Interagency Center for the Evaluation of Alternative Toxicological Methods." The new act also provides that the ICCVAM shall be composed of the heads (or their designees) of 15 named federal agencies plus "[a]ny other agency that develops, or employs tests or test data using animals, or regulates on the basis of the use of animals in toxicity testing."This statute amended the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972, the Tuna Conventions Act of 1950, and the South Pacific Tuna Act of 1988, all of which are discussed in this report.This statute amended the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972, the Dolphin Protection Consumer Information Act, and the Tuna Conventions Act of 1950, all of which are discussed in this report.This statute makes it a crime to (1) willfully disturb or kill any bird, fish, or wild animal, or take or destroy the eggs or nest of any bird or fish, on any lands or waters set apart or reserved under federal law as sanctuaries, refuges, or breeding grounds for such birds, fish, or animals (18 U.S.C.
§ 41); (2) import species of wild animals, wild birds, fish (including mollusks and crustacea), amphibians, reptiles, or the offspring or eggs or any of the foregoing which the Secretary of the Interior prescribes by regulation to be injurious to human beings or to the interests of agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or wildlife, except that the Secretary may permit importation for zoological, education, medical, or scientific purposes (18 U.S.C. § 42); or (3) use an aircraft or a motor vehicle to hunt, or to pollute a watering hole of, any wild unbranded horse, mare, colt, or burro running at large on any public land or ranges (18 U.S.C. § 47). P.L. 110-161 , § 109, 121 Stat. 2119 (2007), contains an exception to this last provision. It permits the Secretary of the Interior to use "helicopters or motor vehicles on the Sheldon and Hart National Wildlife Refuge for the purpose of capturing and transporting horses and burros," but "[s]uch use shall be in accordance with humane procedures prescribed by the Secretary."This statute, as amended in 1988, makes it unlawful to engage in commerce in any fish or wildlife or plant taken, possessed, transported, or sold in violation of any treaty, or any federal or state law or regulation, or any Indian tribal law. This statute was amended by the Captive Wildlife Safety Act, P.L. 108 - 191 (2003), to cover "prohibited wildlife species," which it defines as "any live species of lion, tiger, leopard, cheetah, jaguar, or cougar or any hybrid of such species." The Captive Wildlife Safety Act, however, "does not apply to any licensed, registered, and federally inspected exhibitor (zoos, circuses, etc.) or research facility. It also exempts sanctuaries, humane societies, animal shelters, or societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals that meet specified criteria."This statute, which was amended by the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Reauthorization Act of 2006, P.L. 109 - 479 , provides that, except with respect to highly migratory species of fish, "the United States claims, and will exercise in the manner provided for in this act, sovereign rights and exclusive fishery management authority over all fish, and all Continental Shelf fishery resources.
..." 16 U.S.C. § 1811(a). See also, "Shark Finning Prohibition Act."This statute imposes a moratorium on the taking ("take" means "harass, hunt, capture, or kill") and importation of all marine mammals or their products, except that the Secretary of Commerce or Interior (depending on the type of animal) may grant permits to allow taking and importation (1) for scientific research and public display, (2) incidentally, in the course of commercial fishing, and (3) "in accord with sound principles of resource protection and conservation." The act also makes it unlawful, except pursuant to a permit for scientific research, to import a marine mammal that is (1) pregnant, (2) nursing or less than eight months old, (3) taken from a species or population stock designated by the Secretary as depleted, or (4) taken in a manner deemed inhumane by the Secretary.The act also establishes a Marine Mammal Commission whose duties include undertaking studies and making recommendations as to the protection and conservation of marine mammals. 16 U.S.C. §§ 1401-1402.An exception to the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 authorizes the Secretary of Defense to "authorize the taking of not more than 25 marine mammals [not a member of an endangered or threatened species] each year for national defense purposes. Any such authorization may be made only with the concurrence of the Secretary of Commerce after consultation with the Marine Mammal Commission. ..." 10 U.S.C. § 7524.In 1988, P.L. 100 - 711 added "a number of provisions to the act for the specific purpose of reducing the morality [sic] of porpoise in the course of fishing for yellowfin tuna in the ETP [Eastern Tropical Pacific]."In 1992, Congress added two new laws to the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972. P.L. 102 - 523 added the International Dolphin Conservation Act of 1992, "to prohibit certain tuna harvesting practices." P.L.
102 - 587 , Title III, added the Marine Mammal Health and Stranding Response Act, which directed the establishment of the Marine Mammal Health and Stranding Response Program, the purpose of which is to collect data on marine mammal health and to coordinate effective responses to unusual mortality events by establishing a process in the Department of Commerce.The Marine Mammal Protection Act Amendments of 1994, P.L. 103 - 238 , was intended "to improve the program to reduce the incidental taking of marine mammals during the course of commercial fishing operations, and for other purposes. ..." S.Rept. 103-220, 103 rd Cong., 2 nd sess. (1994). The 1994 statute, among other things, amended 16 U.S.C. § 1374 to authorize the Secretary of Commerce to issue permits "for the importation of polar bear parts (other than internal organs) taken in sport hunts in Canada," but required the Secretary to "undertake a scientific review of the impact of [such] permits ... on the polar bear population stocks in Canada within 2 years. ..." 108 Stat. 539 (1994).The 1994 statute also amended 16 U.S.C. § 1374 to provide that the Secretary of Commerce may issue permits "to take or import a marine mammal for the purpose of public display only to a person which the Secretary determines ... is registered or holds a license issued under" the Animal Welfare Act. The effect of this provision apparently is that the Department of Agriculture rather than the National Marine Fisheries Service is authorized to regulate such marine mammals once they are held in captivity. 108 Stat. 537 (1994).In 1997, the International Dolphin Conservation Program Act, P.L. 105 - 42 , amended various provisions of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972. In 2007, title IX of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Reauthorization Act of 2006, P.L. 109 - 479 , added the United States-Russia Polar Bear Conservation and Management Act of 2006 to the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972.This statute amended the act to Prevent Pollution from Ships, 33 U.S.C.
§§ 1901-1915, to, among other things, direct the Environmental Protection Agency, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, to study "improper disposal practices and associated specific plastic articles that occur in the environment with sufficient frequency to cause death or injury to fish or wildlife."This statute authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to designate national marine sanctuaries.This statute states that its purpose "is to assist in the conservation of marine turtles and the nesting habitats of marine turtles in foreign countries by supporting and providing financial resources for projects to converse the nesting habitats, conserve marine turtles in those habitats, and address other threats to the survival of marine turtles."This statute authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to purchase or rent such areas as have been approved for purchase or rental by the Migratory Bird Conservation Commission "which he determines to be suitable for use as an inviolate sanctuary, or for any other management purpose, for migratory birds."This fund was created in 1998 to carry out the African Elephant Conservation Act, the Asian Elephant Conservation Act, and the Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Act. Separate accounts in the fund were established as the Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Account, and the Great Ape Conservation Fund.This statute is designed to promote "the improved health and productivity of domestic livestock, poultry, aquatic animals, and other income-producing animals that are essential to food supply of the United States and the welfare of producers and consumers of animal products." 7 U.S.C. § 3191, as amended by P.L. 104 - 127 (1996), § 810. It was amended in 1990 to require the Secretary of Agriculture to commission the National Academy of Sciences "to conduct a study of the delivery system utilized to provide farmers ... and ranchers with animal care and veterinary medical services, including animal drugs." The study shall assess opportunities to, among other things, "advance the well-being and treatment of farm animals." 7 U.S.C. § 3193.P.L. 104 - 127 (1996), § 812, amended 7 U.S.C.
